Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers for Cross-Module
Extensibility with an Internal Build System
Jeff Smitsa , Gabriël Konata , and Eelco Vissera
a Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Abstract
Context Compilation time is an important factor in the adaptability of a software project. Fast recompilation
enables cheap experimentation with changes to a project, as those changes can be tested quickly. Separate
and incremental compilation has been a topic of interest for a long time to facilitate fast recompilation.
Inquiry Despite the benefits of an incremental compiler, such compilers are usually not the default. This is
because incrementalization requires cross-cutting, complicated, and error-prone techniques such as dependency tracking, caching, cache invalidation, and change detection. Especially in compilers for languages with
cross-module definitions and integration, correctly and efficiently implementing an incremental compiler can
be a challenge. Retrofitting incrementality into a compiler is even harder. We address this problem by developing a compiler design approach that reuses parts of an existing non-incremental compiler to lower the
cost of building an incremental compiler. It also gives an intuition into compiling difficult-to-incrementalize
language features through staging.
Approach We use the compiler design approach presented in this paper to develop an incremental compiler for the Stratego term-rewriting language. This language has a set of features that at first glance look
incompatible with incremental compilation. Therefore, we treat Stratego as our critical case to demonstrate
the approach on. We show how this approach decomposes the original compiler and has a solution to compile Stratego incrementally. The key idea on which we build our incremental compiler is to internally use an
incremental build system to wire together the components we extract from the original compiler.
Knowledge The resulting compiler is already in use as a replacement of the original whole-program compiler. We find that the incremental build system inside the compiler is a crucial component of our approach.
This allows a compiler writer to think in multiple steps of compilation, and combine that into an incremental
compiler almost effortlessly. Normally, separate compilation à la C is facilitated by an external build system,
where the programmer is responsible for managing dependencies between files. We reuse an existing sound
and optimal incremental build system, and integrate its dependency tracking into the compiler.
Grounding The incremental compiler for Stratego is available as an artefact along with this article. We
evaluate it on a large Stratego project to test its performance. The benchmark replays edits to the Stratego
project from version control. These benchmarks are part of the artefact, packaged as a virtual machine image
for easy reproducibility.
Importance Although we demonstrate our design approach on the Stratego programming language, we
also describe it generally throughout this paper. Many currently used programming languages have a compiler that is much slower than necessary. Our design provides an approach to change this, by reusing an
existing compiler and making it incremental within a reasonable amount of time.
ACM CCS 2012
Software and its engineering → Extensible languages; Incremental compilers;
Keywords separate compilation, incremental compilation, extensible language definition, stratego, term

rewriting

The Art, Science, and Engineering of Programming
Submitted

October 2, 2019

Published

February 17, 2020

doi

10.22152/programming-journal.org/2020/4/16
© Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser
This work is licensed under a “CC BY 4.0” license.
In The Art, Science, and Engineering of Programming, vol. 4, no. 3, 2020, article 16; 29 pages.

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

1

Introduction

Compilation time of a software project is an important factor in how easily the
project can be changed. When the compilation time is low, it is cheap to experiment
with changes to the project, which can be tested immediately after recompilation.
Therefore, fast recompilation has been a topic of interest for a long time [1, p. 384].
Already in the early times of FORTRAN (as of FORTRAN II [1, p. 384]), independent
compilation of modules was used to speed up recompilation. This allowed a change
in one module to require only the recompilation of that module and linking against
the previously compiled other modules of the program. Skipping the compilation of
all modules except the changed one was a significant improvement over compiling
everything again. This did come at the cost of possible link-time issues. To be able to
link the program together, the modules needed to be up-to-date with the data layout
defined in COMMON. This was done manually and only checked by the programmer.
Mesa introduced separate compilation, which solved this issue by moving the static
checks of cross-module dependencies to compile-time [7]. When a Mesa module is
compiled, the result includes a symbol file that can be used during the compilation of
other modules that depend on that module. Other languages such as ML and C use
interface files that are written by the programmer. Separate compilation brought back
type correctness for statically typed programs, while preserving fast recompilation
from independent compilation.
To further speed up recompilation, we can save intermediate results during compilation. If parts of the program do not change, then the intermediate results of those
parts can be reused. The term separate compilation applies to compilation where
intermediate results are saved per file [7]. For sub-file level tracking of changes and
intermediate results, the term incremental compilation is used [17, 18].
Incremental compilation has clear benefits for recompilation speed. However, to
make a compiler incremental, we must split the compilation process into separate
(ideally independent) parts, track dependencies between these parts, cache previous
results, perform cache invalidation, persist caches to disk, detect changes, and propagate them. Unfortunately, this is far from trivial, as these techniques are complicated
and error-prone, and cross-cut the concerns of the compiler. Especially in a compiler
for a language requiring cross-module linking and integration, correctly and efficiently
implementing an incremental compiler can be challenging.
In this paper, we present an approach to the design of incremental compilers that
separates the language-specific aspects of a compilation schema from the languageindependent aspects of tracking the impact of a change on the output of compilation.
Our compilation method is a hybrid of separate and incremental compilation. It
is separate compilation in the sense that we process a changed file in its entirety.
However, instead of producing a single intermediate representation for a file, we
split the intermediate representation into smaller units (e.g. top-level definitions)
and separate summaries for static analysis. By splitting up the file early, we can then
proceed to process each unit separately. Changing one of the units within a file will
only require the reading and splitting up of that file, after which further processing
can proceed incrementally. We use PIE [14, 15] – an efficient, precise, and expressive

16: 2

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

incremental build system – to tie together the components of the compiler in order
to efficiently propagate changes through the compiler pipeline. We have developed
this approach to incrementalize the compiler of Stratego [2, 3], a term rewriting
language with open extensibility features. Our approach allows us to reuse almost all
of the existing compiler while gaining great improvements in recompilation speed. We
evaluate the incremental Stratego compiler with a benchmark on the version control
history of a large Stratego project.
In summary, the paper provides the following contributions:
We present a general design approach for constructing a hybrid separate/incremental compiler from compiler components and a build system.
We present an application of the approach in the design and implementation of a
hybrid separate/incremental compiler for the Stratego transformation language,
for which previously only a whole program compiler was available.
We evaluate the performance of the Stratego incremental compiler applied to
a version history of the WebDSL code base. While the from-scratch time of the
incremental compiler is longer than the original compiler, the recompilation time
of the incremental compiler is less than 10 % of the from-scratch time in most cases.
We proceed as follows. In the next section we discuss the open extensibility
features of the Stratego languages, their application to modular language definition,
and indicate how these features affect separate/incremental compilation. In section 3,
we analyse the interaction between compilers and build systems in general, and
discuss the whole program Stratego compiler and a previous attempt at making it
incremental. In section 4, we describe our incremental compilation design approach
and its application to Stratego. In section 5, we compare the performance of the
incremental compiler to the performance of the original, whole-program Stratego
compiler, and demonstrate the effectiveness of our solution for successive compilations.
In section 6, we discuss related work.
Outline

2

Open Extensibility in Stratego

The goal of the expression problem as formulated by Wadler [26] “is to define a datatype
by cases, where one can add new cases to the datatype and new functions over the
datatype, without recompiling existing code, and while retaining static type safety
(e.g., no casts).” The example used to illustrate the expression problem is the modular
definition of a language consisting of a data type for its abstract syntax and operations
such as evaluation and pretty-printing on that data type. The problem illustrates
the difference in capabilities between object-oriented programming, in which data
extension is easy, and functional programming, in which extension with operations is
easy.
The Stratego transformation language was designed to support modular language
definition with open extensibility. A module can extend a language definition with
new AST constructors and/or with new operations, as we will illustrate below. Alas,

16: 3

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

the language design does not count as a solution to the expression problem since it
requires whole program compilation and the language is dynamically typed. In this
paper, we address the problem of incrementally compiling Stratego programs in the
face of cross-module extensibility of operations (aka strategies), bringing it closer to
a solution of the expression problem. In this section, we illustrate the use of open
extensibility in Stratego, we discuss the language features that enable that and how
they affect separate/incremental compilation, and we discuss a real world application
of open extensibility in the WebDSL compiler.
We illustrate Stratego’s extensibility with a fragment from the TFA
example language borrowed from Visser [24]. The language definition in figure 1 is
organized in a matrix where each cell corresponds to a Stratego module. The columns
correspond to language aspects and the rows define data types or transformations. The
modules in the top row define the abstract syntax of a language aspect: a core language
with variables and function calls, arithmetic expressions, and control-flow constructs.1
The modules in the second row define the desugar transformation. Arithmetic operator
applications are desugared to function applications (taking the AST constructor as
function name, using the pattern f#(ts) that generically deconstructs a term into
its constructor f and child terms ts), for loops are desugared to while loops with
the appropriate initialization, and if-then statements are desugared to if-then-else
statements. The modules in the third row define the eval transformation using rewrite
rules for basic reductions and a strategy to define evaluation order. (The details are not
relevant for the topic of the paper.) The TFA example described by Visser [24] provides
more (interesting) language extensions and operations, but figure 1 demonstrates the
essential extensibility features.
The example illustrates how we can orthogonally extend a language definition
with new constructors and/or transformations. We discuss the language features that
enable this extensibility.
An Example

Stratego programs are organized in modules, defined in separate files. A
module can import other modules, making their contents accessible. Imports are
transitive. Modules can define algebraic data type signatures, rewrite rules, and
strategies.
Modules

Strategic Rewriting In Stratego, transformations are defined using term pattern
matching (?p) and term pattern instantiation (!p) as basic operations (also known as
match and build). For example, a rewrite ?Add(x, y); !Add(y, x) swaps the subterms of
an Add term, by sequentially composing a match and a build. Pattern matching is a

first-class operation. That is, it is not bound to the use in a pattern matching construct
that handles all cases. Thus, a pattern match fails when it is applied to a term that
does not match, and is allowed to do so. Failure is first class (any transformation may

1

One can argue with the choice of core language, but that is not the topic of this paper.

16: 4

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

i ::= [0 − 9]+
e ::= i e1 +e2 e1 *e2

p ::= b
b ::= begin st ∗ end
st ::= var x : t ; x :=e;

e1 &e2 e1 |e2 . . .

f (e1 ,...,en ); b

st ::= if e then st ∗ else st ∗ end
if e then st ∗ end
while e do st ∗ end
for x := e1 to e2 do st ∗ end

t ::= int

e ::= x f (e1 ,...,en )
t ::= void
module desugar/core

module desugar/int
imports desugar/core

module desugar/control
imports desugar/core

Desugar = BinOpToCall

Desugar =
ForToWhile <+ IfThenToIfElse

desugar = innermost(Desugar)
Desugar = fail
BinOpToCall :
f#([e1, e2]) → |[ f(e1, e2) ]|
where <is-bin-op> f
is-bin-op :
?"Add"
<+ ?"Mul"
// etc.

ForToWhile :
|[ for x := e1 to e2 do st* end ]| →
|[ begin
var x : int; var y : int;
x := e1; y := e2;
while x <= y do
st* x := x + 1;
end
end ]|
where new ⇒ y
IfThenToIfElse :
|[ if e then st* end ]| →
|[ if e then st* else end ]|

module eval/core

eval =
eval-special
<+ all(eval); try(eval-exp)

module eval/int
imports eval/core

module eval/control
imports eval/core

eval-special = eval-or <+ eval-and

eval-special =
eval-if <+ eval-while
; eval

eval-exp =
EvalAdd
<+ EvalMul
// etc.

eval-special =
EvalVar <+ eval-stats
<+ eval-assign
<+ eval-declaration
eval-assign =
|[ x := <eval ⇒ e> ]|
; rules( EvalVar.x : |[ x ]| → |[ e ]| )

eval-if =
|[ if <eval> then <*:id> else <*:id> end ]|
; EvalIf; eval-stat

EvalAdd: |[ Add(i, j) ]| → |[ k ]|
where <addS> (i, j) ⇒ k
EvalMul: |[ Mul(i, j) ]| → |[ k ]|
where <mulS> (i, j) ⇒ k

eval-declaration =
?|[ var x : t; ]|
; rules( EvalVar+x :- |[ x ]| )

eval-while :
st@|[ while e do st* end ]| →
|[ if e then st* st else end ]|
EvalIf :
|[ if i then st1* else st2* end ]| →
|[ begin st1* end ]|
where <not-zero> i

eval-stats =
Stats({| EvalVar : map(eval) |})
eval-exp = fail

EvalIf :
|[ if 0 then st1* else st2* end ]| →
|[ begin st2* end ]|

Figure 1 The TFA language. Columns are modules core, int, and control, rows are aspects

grammar, desugaring, and evaluation.

16: 5

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

fail) and is handled by the choice combinator <+. The choice s1 <+ s2 between two
transformations first applies s1 and when that fails applies s2.
In general, Stratego provides composition of transformation strategies from pattern
matching and instantiation using a small set of combinators for control (including
sequential composition and choice) and generic term traversal.
Named Strategies and Rules A strategy definition f = s names a strategy expression
s and can be invoked as a combinator using its name. For example, the definition
desugar = innermost(Desugar) defines the desugar transformation as the application of
the innermost strategy with the Desugar rule(s). A rewrite rule f : p1 → p2 where s is
sugar for a strategy f = {x,..: ?p1; where(s); !p2}, i.e. it rewrites a term matching p1 to an
instance of p2 provided that the condition s succeeds. Using these features, we can

define many small transformation components (rules, strategies) and make multiple
different compositions from these basic components. For example, we can compose
rewrite rules using choice (e.g. EvalAdd <+ EvalMul), to apply multiple rules to a term.
The key to the extension of transformations illustrated in figure 1
is Stratego’s open extensibility of rules and strategies. A module may provide several
definitions for the same name. And such definitions may be defined across several
modules, independently of each other. For example, the desugar/core module defines
the desugar strategy in terms of the Desugar strategy. It defines the latter as the
fail strategy, which always fails. Thus, applying the desugar strategy as defined in
that module performs the identity transformation. However, the desugar/int and
desugar/control modules (independently) extend the definition of Desugar. When
combining these modules the definitions of Desugar are combined to
Open Extensibility

Desugar = fail <+ BinOpToCall <+ ForToWhile <+ IfThenToIfElse

and the desugar strategy normalizes a term with respect to those rewrite rules.
This extensibility feature is the core reason that Stratego has a whole program
compiler. All modules of a program are combined in order to gather and combine
all the extensions of each strategy. In addition, there are two more features that
complicate separate/incremental compilation: dynamic rules and overlays.
Dynamic rules are rewrite rules that are defined dynamically during
a transformation using the rules(...) construct. For example, the evaluation strategy
in figure 1 uses a dynamic rule EvalVar to map variables to values. Furthermore, a
dynamic rule gives rise to a number of derived strategies for applying and reflecting on
the dynamic rule. There are currently 18 such derived strategies. Only one definition
of each of these derived strategies should be generated per dynamic rule name, even
if it is defined in multiple modules. Therefore, this feature requires global program
information.
Dynamic Rules

Overlays (which do not appear in the example in figure 1) are pattern
aliases that can be used in both match and build position [23]. The applications of
overlays are syntactically indistinguishable from regular terms. Overlays are greedily
expanded; at runtime they are no longer available by name. A module does not need
Overlays

16: 6

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser
Table 1 Code metrics of the WebDSL compiler code base.
# of modules

399

# of distinct named strategies
# of congruences
# of dynamic rule helper strategies (18 × 371)
# of user-defined strategies (rest)

10 091
769
6678
2644

# of modules in which a named strategy is defined
1 module
2–10 modules
11–20 modules
21–30 modules
> 31 modules

10 091
9234
826
19
8
4

# of possibly ambiguous strategy use sites

942

# of overlay definitions

19

# of modules in which a distinct overlay is used
0 modules
1 module
2 modules
23 modules

19
8
9
1
1

# of distinct dynamic rule names

371

# of contributions per dynamic rule name
1 contribution
2 contributions
3 contributions
4 contributions
8 contributions
10 contributions

371
334
26
5
3
2
1

to import the module that defines the overlay for it to be available. Therefore the
compiler needs to know all overlay definitions in the entire program to identify all
their uses and expand them, affecting incremental compilation.
The extensibility features discussed above
are used in practice in compilers for languages used in production. For example,
WebDSL, a domain-specific web programming language [8, 10], consists of a number
of sublanguages such as for the definition of data models, querying, computation, user
interface templates, and access control [9, 25]. The WebDSL compiler uses the open
extensibility of Stratego to define extensions to basic analysis and transformation
strategies per sublanguage. We present some relevant statistics of the WebDSL language definition in table 1 to show the relevance of the previously identified Stratego
features in a real-world language definition.
The code base of the compiler consists of 399 modules with 2644 distinct strategies
in the source code. Many additional strategies are generated as helpers of dynamic
rules (6678), and constructors of terms (769) are usable as strategies as well. A total
of 10091 strategies are compiled by the stratego compiler when the entire project is
Open Extensibility in the WebDSL Compiler

16: 7

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

./program.c
cc
int lib_fun(int);
int main(char** c) {

./program.o
ld

./program

./mylib.c
cc

./mylib.o

int lib_fun(int c) {

Figure 2 An example build of a simple C project.

built. Out of those strategies, 857 have definitions in more than one module, showing
how much the cross-modular extension feature is used.
Ambiguous strategy use sites are numerous within the codebase, 942 calls to a
strategy are initially ambiguous in arity. Overlays are not used very much, only 19
definitions exist in the codebase and 8 of those are not even used any more. Most
overlays are only used in one module (usually the defining module), although one is
used in 23 modules.
The project uses 371 dynamic rules, most of which (334) have only one definition.
These are most likely used as scoped mutable variables, rather than proper dynamic
rewrite rules. That still leaves 37 dynamic rules with multiple definitions in different
places.

3

Compiler Architectures and Build Systems

Compilation of Stratego’s open extensibility requires the integration of definitions
from multiple modules, precluding a simple separate compilation model. In this
section, we first recall how in separate compilation (for the C language) a compiler
outsources dependency tracking and computing which files to recompile to a build
system; an idea we will build on for our incremental compiler. Then we review the
original whole program compilation model for Stratego and its limited support for
separate compilation. We also discuss a previous attempt at incremental compilation
by dynamic linking.
3.1 Separate Compilation and Build Systems

Separate compilation allows efficient recompilation of programs consisting of multiple
compilation units. Only the compilation units that are affected by a change need to be
recompiled. Typically, the work of determining which compilation units to recompile
is not done by the compiler, but by an external build system. This is a nice separation
of concerns. The compiler is not complicated by tracking dependencies and whether
target files are up-to-date and the build system has to know only the external interface
of the compiler.
For example, consider the C programming language and the compilation scenario
illustrated in figure 2. C has a separate compiler, which translates a .c source file
and to .o object file. Cross-module static checking is enabled by means of ‘forward

16: 8

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

./m.str
imports k
strategies
s1
s1
s2

Main.java

s1, s1 (m)

compiler
Front-end

s1_0_0

Back-end
s1_0_0.java

s2 (m)
s2 (m), s2 (k)
./k.str
strategies
s2
s3

InteropRegistrer.java

s2_0_0
s2_0_0.java

s2 (k)
s3 (k)

s3_0_0

s3_0_0.java
reads ﬁle
writes ﬁle
contributes to

Figure 3 Whole-program compilation example for Stratego. All modules are discovered

and merged by a single process.

declarations’ of functions (which are typically defined in additional header files
included during preprocessing), defining the required interface to be implemented
by the other files. Object files are combined into an executable by a linker. Thus,
building a C program involves compiling all its files and then linking the resulting
object files. Most C projects use a build system such as Make for this process such that
only the files that are changed (or are affected by a change in a header file) need to
be recompiled.
While this separation of concerns between compiler and build system is attractive
for the compiler writer, it is less so for the programmer who needs to make sure the
build system configuration accurately reflects the dependencies in the program often
leading to unsound configurations, requiring frequent expensive from-scratch builds.
3.2 Whole-Program Compilation

The simple separate compilation model of C does not apply to Stratego because strategy
definitions across modules need to be integrated. Therefore, Stratego’s compiler uses a
whole program compilation model [3] as illustrated in figure 3. (The original compiler
translated Stratego to C. The current compiler produces Java code. The compiler
architecture is unchanged.) The compiler reads all module files by following imports
from the main file of a Stratego program. After parsing the files, the compiler builds
a single internal model of the program. Strategy names (which can be overloaded
in addition to have multiple definitions) are disambiguated by including the arity in
the name. Then multiple definitions with the same name are merged into a single
definition. Strategy definitions are merged by renaming the arguments to be consistent,
scoping each strategy body, and defining the merged body as a choice between the two
bodies, as illustrated in figure 4. The order between definitions from different modules
is undefined. The back-end of the compiler translates the simplified, merged definitions
to Java classes and extracts information such as term constructors, constants, and
strategy names to put into the Main and InteropRegistrer classes.

16: 9

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System
desugar(|e) = CallT(\SVar(n) → n\, id , id)
desugar(|env): Var(e) → <lookup> (e, env)

Figure 4

⇒

desugar(|e1) =
CallT(\SVar(n) → n\, id , id)
<+ {e: (Var(e) → <lookup> (e, e1))}

Integration of strategy definitions with the same name.

This process is illustrated by figure 3. Strategies s1 and s3 are only defined in one
module, and each have their corresponding Java class in the compiler output. Strategy
s2 is defined in both modules, and merged by the compiler into a single Java class.
While the Stratego compiler is a whole-program
compiler, it has support for separate compilation of libraries. Compiled libraries consist
of an interface (list of strategies and term constructors), and the Java classes with the
compiled code. However, these libraries are second-class citizens. A compiled library
can only be imported in its entirety since its internal module structure is discarded.
Furthermore, separate compilation is achieved by limiting open extensibility to library boundaries; an (external) strategy defined in a library can not be redefined or
extended. Dynamic rules defined in a library cannot be extended either.
To recover some of the expected functionality for external strategies, Stratego provides two special keywords, extend and override, which can be applied to a definition
that is already defined in an imported library. The override keyword will override
the definition with the local one, while the extend keyword overrides the definition
but can call the original through the proceed keyword. These modifiers can only be
applied to a single definition, i.e. these definitions cannot be further extended like
regular strategy definitions. Calls to proceed have the same overhead as that of a
normal strategy call, thus making this form of strategy extension more expensive at
run-time too.
Thus, separate compilation allows the creation of libraries with reusable functionality, but without the idiomatic extensibility features of Stratego to interact with that
code.
Limited Separate Compilation Support

3.3 Independent Compilation with Dynamic Linking

In a case study of the Stratego compiler for the Pluto incremental build system, Erdweg,
Lichter, and Weiel developed a “file-level incremental” compiler for Stratego [6]. To
understand that model, we first discuss the Stratego to Java compilation scheme.
Figure 5 illustrates the compilation scheme. Each compiled
strategy definition is a class that extends the Strategy abstract class. This class has
invocation methods for a number of different arities with a default implementation
that dispatches to a general method for two arrays of arguments (the strategy and term
arguments). A generated strategy class extends this abstract class and implements
the general method.
Strategy names are translated to the same name with underscores instead of dashes
and followed by their arity separated by underscores. Each class has a public static
Java Compilation Scheme

16: 10

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser
desugar(|env): Var(e) → <lookup> (e, env)

⇓
public class desugar_0_1 extends Strategy {
public static Strategy instance = new desugar_0_1();
public IStrategoTerm invokeDynamic(IStrategoTerm term, Stratego[] sargs, IStrategoTerm[] targs) {
// ... match Var, bind e to local variable, build pair, bind to current term ...
term = lookup_0_0.instance.invoke(term);
return term;
}

}

Figure 5 Stratego to Java compilation scheme.

field instance where the instance of the strategy is saved. This field is used to be able
to override or extend strategies in compiled libraries. The overriding or extending
strategy is a new class that extends the original class, overrides the invocation method,
and overrides the instance field of the original class with an instance of itself.
The Main class that the backend generates provides an entry point into a Stratego
program. If a main strategy is defined, it can be called through the Main class, which
will set up the execution context, compute shared constants and term constructor
objects, and execute the program. The shared constants and term constructor objects
are stored in fields of the Main class and referenced by the other classes.
The InteropRegister registers all compiled strategies in the context object for interoperability with the Java implementation of the Stratego interpreter. This hybrid
interpreter can load compiled libraries like the Stratego standard library through
these InteropRegisters, and then interpret the main program as an AST which was
only compiled with the compiler frontend.
Erdweg, Lichter, and Weiel experimented with
a separate compilation model for Stratego by relying on dynamic linking. To the best
of our understanding from inspecting the code, this was an independent compiler, i.e.
it skipped cross-module static analyses. The case study demonstrates the applicability
of the Pluto build system to dependency tracking and rebuilding within a compiler.
However, no speedup is reported on, nor were the changes merged into the Stratego
compiler.
The compilation model is illustrated in figure 6. The compiler produces for each
Stratego source file a list of Java classes for the strategy definitions in that file. With
some changes to the Stratego runtime system, the Java classes are merged at run-time
rather than merged statically. At the start of the program, all loaded classes register
themselves by name to a StrategyCollector, as illustrated in figure 7.
The Main class initializes fields for every strategy by looking up the strategy by name
from the collector. The collector builds StrategyExecutor objects for this which contain
an array of Strategy classes that are produced by the compiler. These are attempted in
order when the StrategyExecutor is invoked. Although the hashmap lookup based on
Dynamic Linking Compilation Scheme

16: 11

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

./m.str
imports k
strategies
s1
s1
s2

InteropRegistrer.java
compiler

s1_0_0.java
s2_0_0.java

s1_0_0
runtime

InteropRegistrer.java
./k.str
strategies
s2
s3

compiler

s2_0_0.java
s3_0_0.java

s2_0_0
s3_0_0
reads ﬁle
generates
contributes to

Figure 6 Dynamic linking, incremental compilation example for Stratego. The compiler is

run for each module, governed by the Pluto build system. An adapted runtime
merges strategies dynamically, i.e. during program start-up.
desugar(|env): Var(e) → <lookup> (e, env)

⇓
public class desugar_0_1 extends RegisteringStrategy {
public static final Strategy instance = new desugar_0_1();
public static Strategy getStrategy(Context context) {
return context.getStrategyCollector().getStrategyExecutor("desugar_0_1");
}
public void registerImplementators(StrategyCollector collector) {
collector.registerStrategyImplementator("desugar_0_1", instance);
}
public void bindExecutors(StrategyCollector collector) { ... }
public IStrategoTerm invokeDynamic(IStrategoTerm term, IStrategoTerm arg1) {
// ... match Var, bind e to local variable, build pair, bind to current term ...
term = Main.lookup_0_0.invoke(term); // note the difference in invocation!
return term;
}

}

Figure 7 Compilation scheme with dynamic linking.

strategy name is only done once for every strategy call, each strategy definition from
a different module requires a separate invocation in a different class.
3.4 Summary

Whole-program compilation requires minimal configuration and is therefore easy to
use and requires less maintenance. However, whole-program compilation does not
scale because recompilation time is proportional to the size of the entire program
instead of the size of the change. We would like to keep the low-configuration benefit

16: 12

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

of whole-program compilation, while scaling incrementally with the size of the change.
Pure separate compilation cannot be applied, as whole-program knowledge is required
for compilation. The disadvantage of the dynamic linking model is that it shifts
the burden of integrating strategy definitions to run-time, which incurs execution
overhead and requires disruptive changes to the compilation scheme. Therefore, we
need a hybrid-incremental compilation approach, which we will describe and apply
to Stratego in the next section.

4

Incremental Compilation

In this section we first present our approach to incremental compilation in general.
Then we make this concrete by presenting the application of our approach to the
Stratego language and compiler.
4.1 A General Blueprint for Incremental Compilation

Our approach to incremental compilation results in a compiler that, from an external
interface, looks like a whole-program compiler, not a separate compiler. Internally
it uses an incremental build system that handles dynamically discovered dependencies. This build system caches intermediate results within the compiler to make it
incremental.
The key idea is that every file that the compiler reads, is split up into
parts as soon as possible. Each of these parts is then processed by separate build tasks.
This allows the build system to pick up on parts that are unchanged in the file and
parts that are changed. This idea is what gives the compiler sub-file incrementality.
The size of the parts influences how incremental the compiler is. A coarse-grained
split results in less incrementality as more code unrelated to a change is recompiled.
A fine-grained split increases the interaction between the parts during compilation
steps, so that the overhead of the build system tracking all the dependencies becomes
higher than the gains from avoiding repeated compilation of unchanged code.
The split to choose depends on the language features, and how much of the original
compiler to reuse as is. A reasonable split is to choose parts that become separate
outputs of the compiler. However, a finer-grained split is also possible, where parts
are merged in a later stage of the compiler.
Data Splitting

Using an incremental build system to compose a compiler
allows defining compiler stages as build tasks. The outputs of build tasks are cached
and can be reused on recompilation. More tasks means more dependency tracking
and thus more overhead. The number of tasks mostly depends on the granularity
of the data split. However, even stages that operate in succession on a single part
of the data can be split to improve performance. The main idea behind splitting up
a successive operations is to avoid the later (expensive) operations in the chain, if
an early operation results in the same output despite the change in input. That is,
Compiler Stage Splitting

16: 13

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

./m.str

./m.str
imports k
strategies
s1
s1
s2

sub-front-end
s1
front-end

sub-front-end
s2

main
s1_0_0 (m)

back-end

s1_0_0.java

back-end

s2_0_0.java

back-end

s3_0_0.java

s2_0_0 (m)
s2_0_0 (k)

./k.str
strategies
s2
s3

front-end

sub-front-end
s2
sub-front-end
s3

s3_0_0 (k)
static info

reads
generates
requires task

Figure 8

Main.java
back-end
InteropRegistrer.java

Static linking, incremental compilation example for Stratego. A frontend task for
each file, a backend task for each strategy.

if an early operation gives the same output for different inputs, and the following
operations are expensive, it may be worth the build system overhead to split the
operations over multiple tasks. This allows the build system to cut off early when it
observes that an intermediate result has not changed. The trade-off should be made
by taking into account the overhead of the build system for such a change, the chance
that this situation happens, and the expense of the later operations.
4.2 Incremental Compilation for Stratego

To apply this blueprint to Stratego, we split modules by strategy definition and some
extracted information for the static analyses at the end of the front-end of the compiler,
as illustrated in figure 8. Then we merge strategy definitions with the same name
and arity, and call the compiler back-end for each of these merged definitions. This
results in one sub-front-end task per strategy in a file, one front-end task per file, and
one back-end task per merged strategy, to minimise the work when a small change is
made in a file.
The static analyses are done non-incrementally and were found to take an insignificant amount of time in our benchmarks (section 5). Other languages with more
expensive static analyses may benefit from an incremental static analysis stage.
As our build system we use PIE [14, 15], a sound and incremental build system
supporting dynamically discovered dependencies to build tasks and files. Build tasks
are regular (imperative) functions, except that they call other tasks (and can use
their return value) by ‘requiring’ them, which instructs PIE to record a dependency.
Similarly, build tasks can require (read from) or ‘provide’ (write to) files, which records
dependencies to those files. PIE only re-executes tasks when their input changes, when
the return value of a required task changes, or when a required/provided file changes.
Otherwise, PIE returns the cached value of a task, providing incrementality implicitly,
freeing the build developer from having to explicitly handle incrementality.
PIE

16: 14

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser
Listing 1

The build orchestration algorithm, simplified to fit on one page. Tasks (which
are incrementalized) are defined with the task keyword, and called (required)
with req. The subFrontEnd, frontEndLib, and backEnd tasks are calls into parts of
the original compiler, wrapped as tasks so they are incrementalized by the build
system. The front-end tasks require the file corresponding to their input module,
and the back-end tasks provide the generated files, ensuring re-execution when
the input files change.

(a) Type definitions and combining front-end information

(b) Pseudocode for the build orchestration.

into the static information struct.
type M = String // Module name
type S = String // Strategy name
type C = String // Constructor name
type AST = ATerm // Stratego Core AST
type SI = struct: // Static Information
imps: Rel[ M , M ], // Imports
defStrs: Rel[ M , S ], // Defined strategies
defCons: Rel[ M , C ], // ... / constructors
usedStrs: Rel[ M , S ], // Used strategies
usedCons: Rel[ M , C ], // ... / constructors
strUsedCons: Rel[S, C ], // ... per strategy
strASTs: Rel[S, AST ], // Definitions of strategies
olayASTs: Rel[C, AST ], // ... / overlays
type FI = struct: // Front-end Information
imps: Rel[ M , M ],
defStrs: Set[S ],
defCons: Set[C ],
usedStrs: Set[S ],
usedCons: Set[C ],
strUsedCons: Rel[S, C ],
strASTs: Rel[S, AST ],
olayASTs: Rel[C, AST ],
type LI = struct: // Library Information
defStrs: Set[S ],
defCons: Set[C ],
func combineInfo(si: SI, mod: M , fi: FI):
si.imps[mod] := fi.imps ∪ defaultImps
si.defStrs[mod] := fi.defStrs
si.defCons[mod] := fi.defCons
si.usedStrs[mod] := fi.usedStrs
si.usedCons[mod] := fi.usedCons
si.strUsedCons ∪= fi.strUsedCons
// Strategies with the same name go together:
si.strASTs ∪= fi.strASTs
si.olayASTs ∪= fi.olayASTs
func combineInfoLib(si: SI, mod: M , li: LI):
si.defStrs[mod] := li.defStrs
si.defCons[mod] := li.defCons

task main(mainMod: M ):
W: List[ M ] := [mainMod] // Worklist
// Seen modules to prevent loops for cyclic modules
seenMods: Set[ M ] := {mainMod}
staticInfo: SI := SI () // Static analysis info
// FRONTEND + COLLECT STATIC ANALYSIS INFO
while W is not empty:
mod := W.pop()
if mod.isLibrary():
li := req frontEndLib(mod) // cached task call
combineInfoLib(staticInfo, mod, li)
else:
fi := req frontEnd(mod) // cached task call
combineInfo(staticInfo, mod, fi)
// Follow imports
W.pushAll(staticInfo.imps[mod] \ seenMods)
seenMods ∪= imps[mod]
// STATIC ANALYSIS
staticChecks(mainMod, staticInfo)
// BACKEND
for unique (_, str) in staticInfo.defStrs:
olayASTs0 := {}
for con in staticInfo.strUsedCons[str]:
olayASTs0 ∪= staticInfo.olayASTs[con]
// cached task call:
req backEnd(str, staticInfo.strASTs[str], olayASTs0 )

func staticChecks(main: M , si: SI):
visStrs := si.defStrs; visCons := si.defCons
for scc in topoSccs(main, si.imps):
visCons0 := {}; visStrs0 := {}
for mod in scc:
visStrs0 ∪= visStrs[mod]
visCons0 ∪= visCons[mod]
// propagate information from earlier iteration
for m in si.imps[mod]:
visStrs0 ∪= visStrs[m]
visCons0 ∪= visCons[n]
for mod in scc:
visStrs[mod] := visStrs0
visCons[mod] := visCons0
assert(usedStrs[mod] ⊆ visStrs0 )
assert(usedCons[mod] ⊆ visCons0 )

task frontEnd( M ) → F I
task subFrontEnd(S ) → F I
task frontEndLib( M ) → L I
task backEnd(S , Set[AST ], Set[AST ])

16: 15

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

In listing 1 we present the build orchestration algorithm. It includes
type definitions and helper functions in listing 1a, which combine information from
one front-end task into the available global information. Note the commented line,
which combines maps of strategy name to strategy definition AST. This is the point
where strategies from different modules are combined by name.
Listing 1b contains the pseudocode of the build algorithm. The main task which
orchestrates the build uses a worklist, starting from the main module, to run frontend
tasks for each module. New modules are found through imports of processed modules.
The output of the front-end calls are collected and merged by strategy or constructor
name, which is used in the static analysis (staticChecks function). Note that staticChecks
is a function, not a task, and is therefore not cached, because it requires global
information which changes almost every run, making caching moot. If staticChecks
succeeds, the backend is called once per strategy, which takes a list of ASTs for that
strategy (the contributions from different modules) and a list of ASTs for overlays that
are used in the strategy.
Build Algorithm

Static Analysis In order to be compatible with the original whole program compiler,
we reimplement the static analysis in a staticCheck function that takes in the gathered
static information.
We use a topological order over the import graph, so we can easily propagate the
strategy definitions according to the transitive import semantics. But since the graph
can have cycles, we process the strongly connected components (SCCs) of the import
graph instead of individual modules. In other words, a group of modules that import
each other is processed together.
The visible strategies and constructors are computed first, then the used strategies
and constructors are checked to be a subset for each module. To fit all the code on
one page, we have elided some other static analyses from the pseudocode in listing 1.
This includes some analysis information that is used by all back-ends. The following
analyses are included in the implementation:
Ambiguous Strategy Call Resolution Ambiguous strategy calls result from the use of

bare strategy names in strategy argument position. We resolve these names by
looking for strategies of any arity with the same name. If a strategy exists with arity
0/0, the reference must resolve to this strategy and is considered unambiguous.
When this arity does not exist, but there is only one arity available, the name can
also be resolved. In other cases, where zero or more than one strategies are found,
we report an error. The resolved names are returned by the static analysis. The
resolutions are used in the back-end to replace the original names with the ones
that include arity.
Extending and Overriding Strategies To be able to extend or override a strategy, an
external strategy from a library needs to exist. External strategies are declared by
a library along with the compiled implementations. We check for non-overlap of
the relevant sets and give errors on any that are found.
Cyclic Overlay Check While looking into the original compiler details for overlays, we
discovered a missing check. The original compiler will greedily expand overlays.

16: 16

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

Therefore if an overlay definition overlays A() = A() will cause the compiler to loop.
We added a check to fix this bug, which checks if there for cycles between any
overlays (self-loops and indirect cycles). Overlays are only pattern aliases, without
conditionals, so this analysis can be complete. We build a dependency graph of
overlays and check for cycles.
The incremental Stratego compiler was developed by one of
the authors over a period of 10 months. Given the time spent on other tasks, this
comes down to approximately 6-7 months of full-time equivalent. Before the start of
the project the author was not very familiar with the compiler internals of Stratego.
The original Stratego compiler architecture certainly helped to make this quick
development possible. The compiler generally transforms immutable trees (the AST),
which makes it relatively easy to split off parts of it into cacheable tasks. The complicating factor is some mutable data structures that are used for extra (analysis)
information. The mutation of these data structures would not be cached if naively
separated into tasks to be cached.
Implementation Effort

Our incremental compiler is an instantiation of our general blueprint
for hybrid-incremental compilers. We use an incremental build system internally to
incrementalize compilation tasks. Our compilation scheme splits files by top-level
definition resulting in incrementality per top-level definition. It reuses the frontend of the original compiler on each top-level definition separately, and caches the
results. After the front-end, the compiler performs all static analyses, merges top-level
definitions with the same name and arity, and reuses the backend of the original
compiler on each top-level definition separately. The output is completely backward
compatible with the original runtime system.
Conclusion

5

Evaluation

We evaluate the performance of our incremental Stratego compiler by comparison
against the original compiler. In particular, we evaluate the following research questions:
RQ1 Does the incremental compiler scale with the size of the changes?
RQ2 What is the overhead of a clean build with the incremental compiler?
RQ3 Is the incremental compiler correct with respect to the original compiler?
5.1 Research Method

In a controlled setting, we compare the performance of the original compiler and our
incremental compiler. We run our experiments on a MacBook Pro (Early 2013) with an
Intel Core i7 2.8 GHz CPU, 16 GB 1600 MHz DDR3 RAM, and an SSD. The machine is
running Mac OS 10.14.5, Java OpenJDK 1.8.0_212, Docker 2.0.0.3 (31259), VirtualBox
5.2.8 r121009 (Qt5.6.3), and Spoofax 2.5.8. As the experiments are performed inside a

16: 17

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

virtualised environment (Docker), the absolute numbers of our measurement may be
higher than typical usage of the compiler in a normal setting. However, the virtual
machine image can be easily reused by others to reproduce our experiments.
As a benchmark subject we use the WebDSL language implementation. We
use the version control commit history from 2016 to August 2019, consisting of 200
commits.
Subject

We perform measurements by repeating the following steps. We run
a clean build with the incremental compiler. Then we step to the next commit and
pass the list of changed files to the compilation system. We do this for each commit.
We measure the elapsed time for each successive compilation step, through Java’s
System.nanoTime.
We warm up the JVM on which the compiler runs by compiling a project and
3 successive commits, followed by a garbage collection. This was established by
repeatedly running the benchmark on a cold JVM for many commits and noting
the stabilisation of result times within 3 commits. We measure each project in a
separate JVM invocation. During the JVM invocation we warm up once, and repeat
the measurements 5 times. The results are shown as stacked bar-plots (with the
arithmetic mean for each part) with whiskers to show the sample standard deviation
(SD) in compilation time.
Similarly we run the original compiler for each project. This is only done to check
that the compilation time of the original compiler does not vary much. We warm up
the JVM as before with 1+3 compilations, and afterwards measure for each commit,
and again go through the history 5 times. The results are shown with whiskers to
show the full range (R) in compilation time.
Data Collection

5.2 Results

Of all 200 commits, 2 commits failed to build and were excluded from the
results. We inspected these and determined that these failures were due to bugs that
were fixed in the next commit. They failed to build with the original compiler as well
as the incremental compiler.
Figure 9 shows the results of our benchmark for the WebDSL codebase. We found
78 commits that do not change any Stratego files and are excluded from the plot for
that reason. The first commit, which is not compiled incrementally is also excluded.
The remaining 119 commits are sorted in two different ways for comparison. The
number of changed source files are shown in the top plot on the x-axis, the bottom
plot shows the sum of sizes of (abstract syntax) trees passed to sub-front-end tasks.
The number of changed source files does not have a direct correspondence with
the amount of work the incremental compiler needs to do. Although it is in direct
relation with the effort for parsing, subsequent parts of the compiler deal only with
changed top-level definition. The plot shows how the total incremental compile time
does not scale directly with the number of changed files.
Scaling

16: 18

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

40.0

PIE overhead
Backend time
Frontend time
Static check time
Frontend shuffle time
Library shuffle time
Library time
Java compile time

Time (s)

30.0
20.0
10.0

29 50
9 117
7 7
6 5
5 5
5 5
5 5
5 5
4 4
4 4
4 4
4 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1

0.0

No. of changed source files

40.0

PIE overhead
Backend time
Frontend time
Static check time
Frontend shuffle time
Library shuffle time
Library time
Java compile time

Time (s)

30.0
20.0
10.0

4
1.83 4 3.73
4
7.66 3 1.04
3
6.61 3 6.96
3
6.20 3 6.27
3
5.67 3 5.68
3
5.58 3 5.66
3
5.47 3 5.48
3
3.60 3 4.22
3.34
3.06 3 2.82 33
2.49 3 2.43 3
2.41 3 2.39 3
2.37 3 2.35 3
2.31 3 2.13 3
2.06 3 1.98 3
1.93 3 1.85 3
1.79 3 1.66 3
1.51 3 1.48 3
1.47 3 1.43 3
1.32 3 1.19 3
1.19 3 1.16 3
1.13 3 1.08 3
1.07 3 1.06 3
1.06 3 9.91 2
9.90 2 9.63 2
9.17 2 9.13 2
9.13 2 9.13 2
8.96 2 8.10 2
7.91 2 7.77 2
6.71 2 6.12 2
5.81 2 5.70 2
5.67 2 5.49 2
5.48 2 5.15 2
5.10 2 4.91 2
4.91 2 4.65 2
4.56 2 4.54 2
4.50 2 4.47 2
4.19 2 3.49 2
3.46 2 3.18 2
2.88 2 2.85 2
2.80 2 2.80 2
2.76 2 2.70 2
2.57 2 2.36 2
2.30 2 2.28 2
2.21 2 2.12 2
1.95 2 1.83 2
1.73 2 1.65 2
1.65 2 1.52 2
1.43 2 1.18 2
1.08 2 1.06 2
1.03 2 9.00 1
9.00 1 9.00 1
8.90 1 7.50 1
7.10 1 6.80 1
6.00 1 4.20 1
3.80 1 3.80 1
1.60 1 1.40 1
0.00 0 0.00 0
0.00 0 0.00 0
0.00 0 0.00 0

0.0

Size of trees passed to frontend tasks

Figure 9

Benchmark results of the incremental compiler on the WebDSL codebase from two
perspectives. The results are displayed per commit, broken down into different
parts of the incremental compiler. The Y-axis is time in seconds. The X-axis is
number of changed files in the top plot, and the size of the trees passed to the
frontend in the bottom plot.

The front-end times are closer, but still not one-to-one, correlated with the sizes of
trees passed to them. Some Stratego language constructs are desugared into much
larger pieces of code which are then processed further, so a small change to the text
or tree can still have a non-proportional impact.
The code generation part of the compiler is a more straight-forward translation. If
we would order the plot by sizes of trees passed to the back-end tasks, we would see
a strict decline of the back-end times over the plot.
We compare the overhead of the incremental compiler during a clean build,
as this is where the user of the incremental compiler will notice the overhead. For the
WebDSL codebase, the observed clean build time for the incremental compiler is 178.53
seconds, whereas the build time of the original compiler is on average 93.54 seconds
(see also figure 10). In other words, the incremental compiler has an overhead of
90.8 % for clean builds on the WebDSL codebase (RQ2). All incremental compilations
Overhead

16: 19

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

89

90

91

92

93
Time (s)

94

95

96

97

Figure 10 Benchmark results of the original compiler on the WebDSL codebase. The X-axis

is time in seconds. This is a boxplot over the measurements for all commits, as
they have low variance. The whiskers span the full range of measurements.

are under the lowest fastest time with the original compiler. The overhead of the
incremental compiler may have a variety of different causes.
To test the correctness of our compiler, we ran the full WebDSL compiler
test suite. We used the result of compiling the WebDSL project with the incremental
compiler and the original compiler. The two resulting WebDSL compilers had the
same behaviour for all tests (RQ3) (in both successes and a number of failures, which
were expected behaviour according to the WebDSL developers).
Correctness

5.3 Interpretation and Discussion

Although the scaling behaviour of the incremental compiler does not entirely follow
the size of changes to files in the benchmark, the general tendency is there (RQ1).
When we inspect particular pairs of commits with unexpected ordering we find that
unexpectedly cheap (in incremental compile time) commits change a strategy with
the same name over multiple files. Unexpectedly expensive commits make changes in
strategies that use expensive language features that are expanded by the compiler to
much larger pieces of code.
Something we should note is a known issue with the official Stratego parser we
use. This parser can take a relatively long time to parse certain Stratego files. This
issue is solved in a new version of the parser, but that version is currently not stable
enough for us to use in the benchmark.
The size of the overhead seems to reside in something other than the overhead of
PIE itself and the shuffling of information. Our reimplementation of the static analysis
of Stratego is also not the problem. It is unclear what exactly causes the overhead,
but somehow the multitude of calls into the original compiler code or the separate
treatment of the different files is causing overhead in the incremental compiler. We
have attempted experimental changes to the compiler to verify or falsify assumptions
on where this overhead comes from, but so far without success.
Compared to the time it takes for every compilation with the original compiler, a
single clean build is a cost that anecdotally Stratego users are willing to pay for the
speedup they receive on later incremental compilations. Despite the overhead that
is visible in the clean build, our incremental compiler provides a speedup of up to
∼90× for small changes in one or two files. Most commits take less than 10 seconds to
compile, versus the 1.5 minutes that the original compiler takes, massively increasing
productivity for Stratego programmers.

16: 20

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser
5.4 Threats to Validity

We explicitly discuss the threats to validity of this benchmark. In particular, we address
generalizability of the results (external validity), factors that allow for alternative
explanations (internal validity), and suitability of metrics for the evaluations goals
(construct validity).
A threat to the generalizability of our results is that we only evaluated our Stratego compiler on Stratego code that originated from our research group.
Therefore it has a certain code style that may influence the efficacy of our compilation
approach. With the inclusion of WebDSL we cover all Stratego features and the classic
Stratego code style with highly overloaded strategies, which are more expensive to
compile incrementally.
External Validity

A factor that allows an alternative explanation for our results is
miscompilation, where only part of the program was actually successfully compiled,
and another part was ignored. Early in the development of the compiler we found
strange measurement results that came from the error recovery in the parser. Because
of a misconfiguration, the Stratego parser sometimes failed to parse the entire file.
Error recovery in the parser ensured that an abstract syntax tree was still returned,
containing only those top-level strategy definitions that could be parsed successfully.
Because our new compiler did not check if the parser had recovered from errors, parts
of the Stratego program were not actually compiled. We found and fixed this problem
through careful inspection of the benchmark results, and avoided more problems by
running the WebDSL compiler test suite.
Internal Validity

Regarding the suitability of metrics for the evaluation goal, we
measure performance using elapsed time only. We control JIT compilation with a
warmup phase. By running the garbage collector in between measurements, and
monitoring the available memory, we control memory availability during all measurements. However, the incremental compiler stores intermediate results in memory and
may perform differently in environments with less memory available.
Of course we can also not entirely eliminate background noise. However, we have
repeated all measurements five times and see low variance between measurements
(maximum sample standard deviation was 0.36 seconds). This is also visible in figure 9, where we display black whiskers on each stacked bar, all of which are barely
distinguishable.
The virtualisation of our benchmark allows easy distribution of the benchmark
for reproduction of our results. Since we use a long-running macro-benchmark, the
virtualisation does not significantly influence the results. The same benchmark, run
on the same hardware without virtualisation, shows similar results. There is only a
0 % to 25 % reduction in times, where the longest times were reduced most, which
shows the overhead of virtualisation.
Construct Validity

16: 21

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

6

Related Work

Independent compilation was an early way to speed up compilation
by splitting up work and caching the intermediate results [1]. To reinstate guarantees
of static analysis on the entire program, Mesa introduced separate compilation [7]
and inspired other languages such as Modula-2 [28] and (an extension of) Pascal [12]
to do the same. Incremental compilation was another refinement of the concept to
allow a more arbitrary splitting of the work instead of by file [17, 18].
The novelty of our approach is to apply these (already over 30-year-old) ideas in a
new way. We use an incremental build system to piece together parts of an existing
non-incremental compiler into an incremental compiler. The expressive power of the
build system we use, with dynamically discovered dependencies, allows us to fully
express the build of the language inside the compiler. Therefore, the build system
becomes an invisible part of our compiler. The user does not need to configure it on a
per project basis.
Recompilation

Relevant incremental build systems are of course the system we use,
PIE [15], as well as its predecessor Pluto [6]. Pluto was in some ways more powerful
than PIE as it can handle circular build dependencies which require a registered
handler to compute a fixpoint. PIE, however, has much less overhead because it does
not support this feature, and because it can do so-called bottom-up builds [14]. A
bottom-up build requires the list of changed files and directories and uses that and
the previous execution of the build script to do the minimal updates necessary to have
a consistent output again. This gives less overhead from the build system because
parts of the dependency graph do not need to be traversed at all.
Of course there are other build systems, both those that support incrementality
and those in which incrementality can be hacked in by dynamically generating new
build scripts and calling into those. Mokhov, Mitchell, and Jones analyse the features
of different build systems and give an overview of desirable features [16].
Our approach is that the build system is an invisible part of our compiler. The build
is defined once and for all inside the compiler, therefore the user does not need to
configure it on a per project basis.
Build Systems

While our compilation approach works well for reusing an
existing compiler, there are other approaches to incremental compilation, especially
when one is built anew.
An example of a different incrementalization approach is JastAdd, a Java compiler
built entirely on Reference Attribute Grammars (RAGs). These RAGs gave support for
incremental evaluation [19]. To do something similar for the Stratego compiler we
would need to build a completely new Stratego compiler in terms of RAGs, which is a
non-trivial amount of work.
Another example of an incremental compiler is rustc, the compiler for the Rust programming language. The rustc compiler has an experimental incremental compilation
mode that caches intermediate results, automatically records (dynamic) dependencies between these results, and reuses cached results when a dependency chain has
Incremental Compilers

16: 22

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

not been invalidated [29]. However, this incremental compiler mode is not enabled
by default (at the moment of writing) [30], since it sometimes makes compilation
slower because of the overhead of incremental computation. The difference with our
approach is that the Rust compiler automatically tracks dependencies based on reads
and writes of data structures, whereas in our approach, we explicitly state the units of
computation and dependencies between these computations. While explicitly stating
this requires more effort, the advantage is that we can tune the granularity of the
incremental compiler, to prevent the case where fine-grained dependencies cause too
much overhead.
Extensibility has been studied from different perspectives. Erdweg, Giarrusso, and Rendel created a classification of extensibility, where Stratego
falls within ‘extension unification’ [5, §4]. Extension is the terminology for supporting
“language extension of a base language [where] the implementation of the base
language can be reused unchanged to implement the language extension” [5, §2.1,
Def. 1]. Unification is the terminology for supporting “language unification of two
languages [where] the implementation of both languages can be reused unchanged by
adding glue code only” [5, §2.2, Def. 2]. Stratego has a composition of extension and
unification in that languages can be extended from a base (pre-defined strategies),
and the different extensions (contributions to a pre-defined strategy) can be unified
unchanged.
Extension Unification

The expression problem defined by Wadler has more stringent
requirements [26]. There is a reason its name includes ‘problem’. Over the years
there have been many suggested solutions [13, 20, 27] and extensions of the problem
statement [11, 31]. The cited papers are only a few examples.
Stratego does not have the strong static type system required by Wadler for the
original expression problem. This gives the language some more flexibility to attain
the other properties more easily. Both types and functions on those types can be
extended, without a change to the original code. And as presented in this paper,
Stratego can now be separately compiled. There is also no linear order in language
extensions defined in Stratego, as required by Zenger and Odersky [31], nor is there
any glue code for combining different language extensions as required by Kaminski,
Kramer, Carlson, and Van Wyk [11].
Expression Problem

From a different perspective, if we look at competitors in language definitions we might look at attribute grammar systems such as Silver [21]
and JastAdd [4]. Silver has separate compilation and generates multiple separate
Java classes so it can leverage the Java compiler for hybrid incremental compilation,
if composed by an external build system. It also leverages some dynamic linking to
allow more concerns to be compiled separately, and therefore make compilation more
incremental [22]. We are not aware of a publication on JastAdd’s compilation scheme.
Language Definitions

16: 23

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

7

Conclusion

In this paper we have presented a design approach for hybrid incremental compilers.
These compilers look like a whole-program compiler from the outside, but leverage an
internal, incremental build system for incremental compilation. The blueprint of this
design includes considerations on how to split up data and how to split up compiler
stages inside the build system. We have given a concrete example of the blueprint
with an incremental compiler for Stratego.
To motivate the decisions we made in our instantiation of the blueprint, we have
presented an analysis of the Stratego language and shown how different features
require global information to be compiled. The particularly problematic feature is
that of unifying top-level definitions with the same name into a single definition that
attempts the different alternatives.
Our instantiation of the blueprint splits up a file into top-level definitions early,
processes each, then combines all equal-named top-level definitions before moving
on to code generation. The static analysis is reimplemented but all other parts of the
compilation are recycled from the original compiler.
By going through the version control history of a large Stratego project, we have
demonstrated the incrementality of the new compiler. The original compiler takes
about 93±3 seconds to compile the project. Our results show that all but one commit
with 1 file changed are compiled in under 10 seconds, a majority of 1 file changed
commits compile in under 5 seconds, and even the largest commit which changes 50
files is incrementally compilable in under 40 seconds.
We would like to see another real-world programming language gain an incremental
compiler with our design approach. The internally used build system and reuse of
compiler components should make it a reasonably sized project that can greatly benefit
the users of the programming language. It would also strengthen our hypothesis that
this approach is reusable for other programming language compilers.
We would like to thanks the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions.
This research was supported by a gift from the Oracle Corporation and by the NWO
VICI Language Designer’s Workbench project (639.023.206).
Acknowledgements

References

[1]

John Warner Backus and William P. Heising. “Fortran”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Computers 13.4 (1964), pages 382–385. doi: 10.1109/PGEC.1964.263818.

[2]

Martin Bravenboer, Arthur van Dam, Karina Olmos, and Eelco Visser. “Program Transformation with Scoped Dynamic Rewrite Rules”. In: Fundamenta
Informaticae 69.1-2 (2006). https://content.iospress.com/articles/fundamentainformaticae/fi69-1-2-06, pages 123–178.

16: 24

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

[3] Martin Bravenboer, Karl Trygve Kalleberg, Rob Vermaas, and Eelco Visser.
“Stratego/XT 0.17. A language and toolset for program transformation”. In:
Science of Computer Programming 72.1-2 (2008), pages 52–70. doi: 10.1016/j.
scico.2007.11.003.
[4]

Torbjörn Ekman and Görel Hedin. “The JastAdd extensible Java compiler”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2007, October
21-25, 2007, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Edited by Richard P. Gabriel, David F.
Bacon, Cristina Videira Lopes, and Guy L. Steele Jr. ACM, 2007, pages 1–18.
isbn: 978-1-59593-786-5. doi: 10.1145/1297027.1297029.

[5]

Sebastian Erdweg, Paolo G. Giarrusso, and Tillmann Rendel. “Language composition untangled”. In: International Workshop on Language Descriptions, Tools,
and Applications, LDTA ’12, Tallinn, Estonia, March 31 - April 1, 2012. Edited by Anthony Sloane and Suzana Andova. ACM, 2012, page 7. isbn: 978-1-4503-1536-4.
doi: 10.1145/2427048.2427055.

[6] Sebastian Erdweg, Moritz Lichter, and Manuel Weiel. “A sound and optimal
incremental build system with dynamic dependencies”. In: Proceedings of the
2015 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2015, part of SPLASH 2015, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, October 25-30, 2015. Edited by Jonathan Aldrich and Patrick
Eugster. ACM, 2015, pages 89–106. isbn: 978-1-4503-3689-5. doi: 10 . 1145 /
2814270.2814316.
[7]

Charles M. Geschke, James H. Morris Jr., and Edwin H. Satterthwaite. “Early
Experience with Mesa”. In: Communications of the ACM 20.8 (Aug. 1977),
pages 540–553. doi: 10.1145/359763.359771.

[8]

Danny M. Groenewegen, Zef Hemel, Lennart C. L. Kats, and Eelco Visser.
“WebDSL: a domain-specific language for dynamic web applications”. In: Companion to the 23rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA 2008, October 19-13,
2007, Nashville, TN, USA. Edited by Gail E. Harris. ACM, 2008, pages 779–780.
isbn: 978-1-60558-220-7. doi: 10.1145/1449814.1449858.

[9]

Danny M. Groenewegen and Eelco Visser. “Declarative Access Control for
WebDSL: Combining Language Integration and Separation of Concerns”. In:
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Web Engineering, ICWE
2008, 14-18 July 2008, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA. Edited by Daniel
Schwabe, Francisco Curbera, and Paul Dantzig. IEEE, 2008, pages 175–188.
isbn: 978-0-7695-3261-5. doi: 10.1109/ICWE.2008.15.

[10]

Danny M. Groenewegen and Eelco Visser. “Integration of data validation and
user interface concerns in a DSL for web applications”. In: Software and Systems
Modeling 12.1 (2013), pages 35–52. doi: 10.1007/s10270-010-0173-9.

16: 25

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

[11]

Ted Kaminski, Lucas Kramer, Travis Carlson, and Eric Van Wyk. “Reliable
and automatic composition of language extensions to C: the ableC extensible
language framework”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages
1.OOPSLA (2017). doi: 10.1145/3138224.

[12]

Richard B. Kieburtz, W. Barabash, and C. R. Hill. “A Type-Checking Program
Linkage System for Pascal”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Software Engineering, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, May 10-12, 1978. Edited by Maurice
V. Wilkes, Laszlo A. Belady, Y. H. Su, Harry Hayman, and Philip H. Enslow Jr.
IEEE Computer Society, 1978, pages 23–28.

[13] Oleg Kiselyov. “Typed Tagless Final Interpreters”. In: Generic and Indexed Programming - International Spring School, SSGIP 2010, Oxford, UK, March 22-26,
2010, Revised Lectures. Edited by Jeremy Gibbons. Volume 7470. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, 2010, pages 130–174. isbn: 978-3-642-32201-3.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-32202-0_3.
[14]

Gabriël Konat, Sebastian Erdweg, and Eelco Visser. “Scalable incremental building with dynamic task dependencies”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2018, Montpellier, France, September 3-7, 2018. Edited by Marianne Huchard, Christian Kästner,
and Gordon Fraser. ACM, 2018, pages 76–86. doi: 10.1145/3238147.3238196.

[15]

Gabriël Konat, Michael J. Steindorfer, Sebastian Erdweg, and Eelco Visser. “PIE:
A Domain-Specific Language for Interactive Software Development Pipelines”.
In: The Art, Science, and Engineering of Programming 2.3 (Mar. 29, 2018), 9:1–
9:31. issn: 2473-7321. doi: 10.22152/programming-journal.org/2018/2/9. arXiv:
1803.10197v2 [cs.PL].

[16] Andrey Mokhov, Neil Mitchell, and Simon L. Peyton Jones. “Build systems à
la carte”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 2.ICFP (July
2018). doi: 10.1145/3236774.
[17]

Steven P. Reiss. “An approach to incremental compilation”. In: Proceedings of
the 1984 SIGPLAN Symposium on Compiler Construction, Montreal, Canada, June
17-22, 1984. ACM, 1984, pages 144–156. doi: 10.1145/502874.502889.

[18]

James L. Ryan, Richard L. Crandall, and Marion C. Medwedeff. “A conversational system for incremental compilation and execution in a time-sharing
environment”. In: American Federation of Information Processing Societies: Proceedings of the AFIPS ’66 Fall Joint Computer Conference, November 7-10, 1966,
San Francisco, California, USA. Volume 29. AFIPS Conference Proceedings.
AFIPS / ACM / Spartan Books, Washington D.C., 1966, pages 1–21. doi: 10.1145/
1464291.1464293.

[19]

Emma Söderberg and Görel Hedin. Incremental Evaluation of Reference Attribute Grammars using Dynamic Dependency Tracking. Technical report 98.
Department of Computer Science, Lund University, 2012.

16: 26

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

[20]

Mads Torgersen. “The Expression Problem Revisited”. In: ECOOP 2004 - ObjectOriented Programming, 18th European Conference, Oslo, Norway, June 14-18,
2004, Proceedings. Edited by Martin Odersky. Volume 3086. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Springer, 2004, pages 123–143. isbn: 3-540-22159-X. doi:
10.1007/978-3-540-24851-4_6.

[21]

Eric Van Wyk, Derek Bodin, Jimin Gao, and Lijesh Krishnan. “Silver: An extensible attribute grammar system”. In: Science of Computer Programming 75.1-2
(2010), pages 39–54. doi: 10.1016/j.scico.2009.07.004.

[22]

Erik Van Wyk. personal communication. June 17, 2019.

[23] Eelco Visser. “Strategic Pattern Matching”. In: Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 10th International Conference, RTA-99, Trento, Italy, July 2-4, 1999, Proceedings. Edited by Paliath Narendran and Michaël Rusinowitch. Volume 1631.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 1999, pages 30–44. isbn: 3-54066201-4. doi: 10.1007/3-540-48685-2_3.
[24]

Eelco Visser. “Transformations for Abstractions”. In: 5th IEEE International
Workshop on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM 2005), 30 September
- 1 October 2005, Budapest, Hungary. IEEE Computer Society, Oct. 2005. isbn:
0-7695-2292-0. doi: 10.1109/SCAM.2005.26.

[25]

Eelco Visser. “WebDSL: A Case Study in Domain-Specific Language Engineering”. In: Generative and Transformational Techniques in Software Engineering
II, International Summer School, GTTSE 2007. Edited by Ralf Lämmel, Joost
Visser, and João Saraiva. Volume 5235. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Braga, Portugal: Springer, 2007, pages 291–373. isbn: 978-3-540-88642-6. doi:
10.1007/978-3-540-88643-3_7.

[26] Philip Wadler. “The expression problem”. In: Java-genericity mailing list (Nov.
1998). https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/wadler/papers/expression/expression.txt.
(Visited on 2006-11-03).
[27]

Yanlin Wang and Bruno C. D. S. Oliveira. “The expression problem, trivially!”
In: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Modularity, MODULARITY
2016, Málaga, Spain, March 14 - 18, 2016. Edited by Lidia Fuentes, Don S. Batory,
and Krzysztof Czarnecki. ACM, 2016, pages 37–41. isbn: 978-1-4503-3995-7.
doi: 10.1145/2889443.2889448.

[28]

Niklaus Wirth. “Modula-2 and Oberon”. In: Proceedings of the Third ACM SIGPLAN History of Programming Languages Conference (HOPL-III), San Diego,
California, USA, 9-10 June 2007. Edited by Barbara G. Ryder and Brent Hailpern.
ACM, 2007, pages 1–10. doi: 10.1145/1238844.1238847.

[29]

Michael Woerister. Incremental Compilation. Sept. 8, 2016. url: https://blog.
rust-lang.org/2016/09/08/incremental.html (visited on 2019-12-12).

[30] Michael Woerister. Tracking Issue for making incremental compilation the default
for Release Builds. Jan. 29, 2019. url: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/
57968 (visited on 2019-12-12).

16: 27

Constructing Hybrid Incremental Compilers with an Internal Build System

[31] Matthias Zenger and Martin Odersky. “Independently extensible solutions to
the expression problem”. In: Proceedings of the Twelth International Workshop
on Foundations of Object-Oriented Languages (FOOL 12). 2005.

16: 28

Jeff Smits, Gabriël Konat, and Eelco Visser

About the authors

Jeff Smits is a PhD candidate at Delft University of Technology,
where he works on domain-specific languages, language workbenches, data-flow analysis, and compilers. His current work includes designing a DSL for declarative data-flow analysis specification, and separate compilation for a term-rewriting language. You
can contact him at j.smits-1@tudelft.nl and find further information
at https://www.jeffsmits.net/.
Gabriël Konat is a postdoctoral researcher at Delft University of
Technology, where he works on domain-specific languages, language workbenches, bootstrapping, and incrementalization. His
current work includes designing a DSL for programming incremental pipelines, improving the scalability of incremental pipeline
algorithms, and applying incremental pipelines to language workbenches. You can contact him at g.d.p.konat@tudelft.nl and find
further information at https://gkonat.github.io/.
Eelco Visser is Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Professor of Computer
Science and chair of the Programming Languages Group at Delft
University of Technology. His current research is on the foundation
and implementation of declarative specification of programming
languages. You can contact him at e.visser@tudelft.nl and find
further information at https://eelcovisser.org.

16: 29

