Efficient Parallel Self-Adjusting Computation

arXiv:2105.06712v1 [cs.DC] 14 May 2021

Daniel Anderson
Carnegie Mellon University
dlanders@cs.cmu.edu

Guy E. Blelloch
Carnegie Mellon University
guyb@cs.cmu.edu

Anubhav Baweja
Carnegie Mellon University
abaweja@cs.cmu.edu

Umut A. Acar
Carnegie Mellon University
umut@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Self-adjusting computation is an approach for automatically producing dynamic algorithms from static
ones. The approach works by tracking control and data dependencies, and propagating changes through
the dependencies when making an update. Extensively studied in the sequential setting, some results on
parallel self-adjusting computation exist, but are either only applicable to limited classes of computations,
such as map-reduce, or are ad-hoc systems with no theoretical analysis of their performance.
In this paper, we present the first system for parallel self-adjusting computation that applies to a
wide class of nested parallel algorithms and provides theoretical bounds on the work and span of the
resulting dynamic algorithms. As with bounds in the sequential setting, our bounds relate a “distance”
measure between computations on different inputs to the cost of propagating an update. However, here
we also consider parallelism in the propagation cost.
The main innovation in the paper is in using Series-Parallel trees (SP trees) to track sequential and
parallel control dependencies to allow propagation of changes to be applied safely in parallel. We show
both theoretically and through experiments that our system allows algorithms to produce updated results
over large datasets significantly faster than from-scratch execution. We demonstrate our system with
several example applications, including algorithms for dynamic sequences and dynamic trees. In all cases
studied, we show that parallel self-adjusting computation can provide a significant benefit in both work
savings and parallel time.

1

Introduction

Self-adjusting computation is an approach to automatically, or semi automatically, convert a (suitable) static
algorithm to a dynamic one [20, 27, 4, 5, 6, 1, 26, 19]. Most often, self-adjusting computation is implemented
in the form of a change propagation algorithm. The idea, roughly, is to run a static algorithm while keeping
track of data dependencies. Then when an input changes (e.g. adding an edge to a graph), the change
can be propagated through the computation, updating intermediate values, creating new dependencies, and
updating the final output. Not all algorithms are suitable for the approach—for some, updating a single input
value could propagate changes through most of the computation. To account for how much computation
needs to be rerun, researchers have studied the notion of “stability” [6, 1] over classes of changes. The goal is
to bound the “distance” between executions of a program on different inputs based on the distance between
the inputs. For example, for an appropriate sorting algorithm adding an element to the unsorted input list
ideally would cause at most O(log n) recomputation, and that recomputation could be propagated with a
constant factor overhead. This would lead to the performance of a dynamic binary search tree.
In the sequential setting this approach has been applied to a wide variety of algorithms, with various
bounds on the stability, and also cost of change propagation as a function of the computational distance.
Applications includes dynamic trees [6], kinetic data structures [9, 8, 10], convex hulls [3], Huffman coding [7],
and Bayesian inference [11].
More recent work [2, 13, 18, 25, 12] has studied applying change propagation in parallel, allowing for batch
dynamic updates—e.g., adding a set of edges to an existing graph and then propagating those changes in
parallel. Batch updates are particularly important in practice due to the rapid rate of modifications to very
large data sets such as the web graph or social networks. Furthermore, in principle, parallelism and change
propagation should work well together since algorithms with shallow dependence chains tend both to be good
for parallelism (since fewer dependencies means more task can run in parallel) and for dynamic updates (since
changes will not have to propagate as deeply). Indeed several researchers have studied the approach and
developed systems in the applied setting, which show good performance improvements [13, 18, 12] on tasks
such as map-reduce.
In the theoretical setting, recent work has studied bounds on the cost of change propagation for a class
of so-called “round-synchronous” computations [2]. This was applied to generate efficient algorithms for
batch-dynamic trees, supporting batches of links and cuts among other operations. However, the roundsynchronous nature limits the applicability to certain algorithms that fit the restrictive model.
In this paper we develop a more general framework for supporting self-adjusting computation for arbitrary
nested-parallel algorithms. We prove bounds on the cost of change propagation in the framework based on
an appropriately defined distance metric. We have also implemented the framework and run experiments on
a variety of benchmarks. A nested parallel program is one that is built from arbitrary sequential and parallel
composition. A computation is defined recursively as either two computations that are composed in parallel
(a fork), two that are composed sequentially, or the base case which is a sequential strand. Multiway forking
can easily be implemented by nesting parallel compositions.
The crux of our technique is to represent a computation by a dependency graph that is anchored on
a Series-Parallel tree [23], or SP tree for short. An SP tree corresponds to the sequential and parallel
composition of binary nested parallel programs—i.e., parallel composition consists of a P node with two
children (the left-right order does not matter), and sequential composition consists of an S node with two
children (here the order does matter). The leaves are sequential strands of computation, and can just be
modeled as leaf S nodes. The SP tree represents the control dependencies in the program—i.e., that a
particular strand needs to executed before another strand. We additionally introduce R nodes to indicate
data reads, which are used to track data dependencies between writes and reads—i.e., that a particular read
depends on the value of a particular write. Together we refer to the trees as RSP trees, corresponding to the
three types of nodes. The RSP tree of a computation allows propagating a change in a way that respects
sequential control dependencies while allowing parallelism where there is no dependence. We prove that a
parallel change propagation algorithm can propagate changes through the computation in a manner that is
both efficient and scalable.
Programs written in our framework write their inputs and any non-local values that depend on them
into “modifiable references”, or modifiables for short, which track all reads to them and facilitate change
propagation. Like previous work on sequential change propagation [6], we achieve our efficiency by restricting

1

input programs to those which write to each modifiable exactly once. All race-free functional programs satisfy
this restriction. We note that since local variables do not need to be tracked, they are not bound by this
restriction, so the scope of programs amenable to our framework is not just those which are purely functional.
Roughly speaking, given two executions of the same algorithm on different inputs, we define the computation distance to be the work that is performed by one but not the other (see Definition 4.2 for the
full definition). We then show the following theorem that bounds the runtime of the change propagation
algorithm as a function of computation distance.
Theorem 1.1 (Efficiency). Consider an algorithm A, two input states I and I 0 , and their corresponding
RSP trees T and T 0 . Let W∆ = δ(T, T 0 ) denote the computation distance, R∆ denote the number of affected
reads, s denote the span of A, and h denote the maximum heights of T and T 0 . Then, change propagation
on T with the dynamic update (I, I 0 ) runs in O(W∆ + R∆ · h) work in expectation and O(s · h) span w.h.p.1
We have implemented the proposed techniques in a library for C++, which we call PSAC++ (Parallel SelfAdjusting Computation in C++). The library allows writing parallel self-adjusting programs by using several
small annotations in a style similar to writing conventional parallel programs. Self-adjusting programs can
respond to changes to their data by updating their output via the built-in change propagation. Our experiments with several applications show that parallel change propagation can handle a broad variety of batch
changes to input data efficiently and in a scalable fashion. For small changes, parallel change propagation
can yield very significant savings in work; such savings can amount to orders of magnitude of improvement.
For larger changes, parallel change propagation may save some work, and still exploit parallelism, yielding
improvements due to both reduction in work and an increase in scalability. We summarize the contributions
of the paper as follows:
• A general approach for parallel change propagation based on using RSP trees to safely propagate changes
in the correct order while allowing parallelism in the propagation.
• Theoretical bounds on the work (sequential time) and span (parallel time) of our algorithms.
• An implementation as C++ library, with six example applications to study as benchmarks.
• Experimental results that confirm what is backed up by our theoretical analysis, that parallel change
propagation is efficient for a range of applications.

1.1

Technical Overview

The idea of the change propagation algorithm is first to run an algorithm on some initial input while keeping
a trace of reads and writes to “non local” locations. This trace can be thought of as a write-read dependence
graph, indicating what reads depend on what writes (also called a data dependence graph). Along with each
read the trace also stores the code that was run on the value, and maintains some form of control ordering of
the execution. When an input is updated at particular locations, the change propagation algorithm knows
what read those locations and reruns them. This can cause new reads and writes that both update the trace,
and create changes that have to propagated to their readers. Importantly, and one of the biggest challenges
in change propagation, is that the reads that rerun have to do so in control order, otherwise they could use
stale information. For example, if a read A, and a later a read B in program control order both need to be
rerun, running B first might miss updates by A. Since A could do something different when rerun, the trace
might not even know there will be a data dependence between them (A is now going to write to something B
reads). This means that the topological order on the trace’s data dependence graph in insufficient for safety,
and that control dependencies also need to be considered.
In the sequential setting, the total order of all instructions is typically maintained using a dynamic listmaintenance data structure [21] keeping all reads in time order. The structure needs to be dynamic since
during propagation new computation can be added, and old deleted, at arbitrary points in the ordering.
During change-propagation, all reads that are affected by a write are placed in a priority queue prioritized
by this order, and always processing the earliest first.
1 We say that an algorithm has O(f (n)) cost with high probability (w.h.p.) if it has O(c · f (n)) cost with probability at least
1 − 1/nc , c ≥ 1.

2

For our work on parallel change propagation, the broad idea is to organize the control dependencies of
the program around the RSP tree. Unlike the sequential case, instead of having a total order of execution
time, the RSP tree effectively keeps track of the parallel partial order of control dependencies among the
strands. As with the sequential case, we also keep track of all write-read data dependencies. Unlike the
sequential algorithm which uses a priority queue of time order, our algorithm instead uses the RSP tree itself
to maintain the partial order among strands—and this allows running multiple tasks in parallel during the
propagation.
The initial run builds the RSP tree. It stores on each read (R) node a closure to rerun if the value it
read changes2 . When the input is modified, the change-propagation algorithm identifies all readers of the
changed values. We refer to these as the affected readers. Now, instead of adding them to a priority queue
by sequential time order, the algorithm makes some markings in the RSP tree. In particular it starts at each
affected reader and marks all ancestors in the RSP tree. It then traverses the RSP tree and using the marks
finds readers that require and are safe to rerun, i.e., only descending if a node is marked. Whenever it gets to
a P node, the algorithm traverses down whichever children are marked (either left, right, or both in parallel),
and whenever it gets to an internal S node, it traverses down the left branch if it is marked, and then the
right branch if it is marked. At an S node the algorithm never goes down both branches simultaneously
since that would be unsafe—it would run strands in parallel that should be run sequentially.
Whenever the traversal meets an affected reader, change propagation runs the closure associated with
the reader and updates the resulting computation and its corresponding subtree of the RSP tree, possibly
cascading new reads and writes and marking additional regions of the RSP tree for additional propagation. Once the marked regions of the tree have all been traversed, change propagation is complete and the
computation will be fully up to date.

1.2

Related Work

While there is little work on fully fledged parallel self-adjusting computation, a few systems have been
developed.
Incoop. On the programming language side, Bhatodia et al. [13] develop a framework for self-adjusting
computation in the map-reduce paradigm. Their system specifically targets map-reduce-style computations
in a distributed model of computation, and does not provide any theoretical guarantees on the runtime of
updates.
Two for the price of one. Burckhartd et al. [18] were the first to develop a general-purpose system
for parallel self-adjusting computation. They do so by extending the so-called concurrent revisions model
with primitives for self-adjusting computation. This model enables programs to express fork-join parallelism
with versioned types that allow multiple threads to concurrently write to an object that is automatically
aggregated at the join point, in a style similar to Cilk reducers [24]. Their algorithm for self-adjusting
computation then essentially performs memoisation of the versioned writes done by each fork, allowing them
to be looked up and re-used if their dependencies haven’t changed. Their work is evaluated on a set of
five benchmark problems, where it is demonstrated experimentally that the combination of parallelism and
self-adjusting computation is worthwhile, producing both work savings and parallel time speedups. This
work, however, is purely experiential and does not provide theoretical guarantees on the runtime of updates.
iThreads. Bhatodia et al. [12] develop iThreads, a pthreads drop-in replacement that automatically dynamizes the underlying program. The advantage of such a system is that dynamization is completely automatic; the programmer does not even have to annotate their code or add additional primitives to perform
self-adjusting computation. The corresponding downside is that the dynamization is very coarse grained,
since the only units of work that can be re-executed are the entire pthread computations. The user is
therefore unable to fine tune the dynamism, which is often important to optimize self-adjusting programs.
Theoretical guarantees on the runtime of updates are not provided.
PAL. Hammer et al. [25] present Parallel Adaptive Language (PAL), a proposed (though not fully implemented) language for parallel self-adjusting computation. Like other works, including ours, it represents the
trace of a computation using a tree structure, which encodes parallel and sequential dependencies between
computations and the data that they read. Their proposed algorithm, however, requires several nontrivial
2 A closure is a code pointer along with needed local variables.

3

data structures, some of which, such as an efficient concurrent fully dynamic lowest common ancestor (LCA)
structure, do not yet exist. Their evaluation therefore consists of a simulation of the work that would be
performed by the algorithm if said data structures were available, rather than a realistic evaluation.

1.3

Model of Computation

We analyze algorithms in the work-span model, where work is the total number of instructions performed
by the algorithm and span (also called depth) is the length of the longest chain of sequentially dependent
instructions [14]. The model can work-efficiently cross simulate the classic CRCW PRAM model [14], and
the more recent Binary Forking model [16], incurring at most an additional O(log∗ (n)) factor overhead in
the depth due to load balancing. An algorithm with work W and span s can be ran on a p-processor PRAM
in O(W/p + s) time [17].

2

Framework

Our framework for parallel self-adjusting computation is built around a set of core primitives that are easy
to integrate into existing algorithms. In this section, we describe these primitives and give an example
algorithm for illustration.
write(dest: α mod, value : α)
alloc mod(T: type) : T mod
read(m : (α1 mod, ..., αk mod), r : α1 × ... × αk 7→ ())
par(left f : () 7→ () , right f : () 7→ ())
run(f : () 7→ ()) : S
propagate(root : S)

Figure 1: Interface for Parallel Self-Adjusting Computation
Modifiables. The primary mechanism by which computations are dynamised is through the use of modifiable
variables. A modifiable variable, or modifiable for short, is either a value that is part of the input to the
algorithm, or a nonlocal variable whose value depends on the value of another modifiable variable. Algorithms
are dynamised by placing their inputs in modifiables, and ensuring that all nonlocal variables whose values
depend on a modifiable are also placed in modifiables. When a modifiable is updated, our framework can then
automatically determine which values are affected by the resulting changes, and automatically propagate
the appropriate updates.
Modifiables can be allocated either statically, i.e. before the computation is run, or dynamically, in which
case their lifetime will be tied to the scope of the computation that allocated them. Writing to modifiables
is achieved using the write operation. We require that each modifiable is written to at most once during
each run of the computation, and that modifiables are not read before they are written. We also require
that modifiables are only read from and written to by computations that are in the dynamic (nested) scope
of the computation that allocated it.
Read operations. To ensure that dependencies are tracked, modifiables must be read using the read
operation. read reads the values of the given modifiables and invoke the given reader function with their
current values as arguments.
Parallelism. We support fork-join parallelism through a binary fork operation par, which takes two code
thunks and executes them in parallel.
Control. Computations are initiated with the run operation, which returns a handle to the computation
(represented by the root of the RSP tree). After making changes to the input, changes are propagated using
the propagate operation.
Additional primitives. For convenience, we also support an alloc array operation and a corresponding
read array operation for allocating and reading arrays of modifiables. We also support a parallel for
primitive, which executes a given function over a range of values in parallel. We omit the details of these
primitives.
4

S
P

S

S

S

P
S
R

R

P

S
S

R

S

R
R

m1 m2 m3 m4

S
S

R

R

res

Figure 2: The RSP tree of the divide-and-conquer sum algorithm on an input of size four. Dynamically
allocated modifiables are depicted underneath the S node that allocated them. Writes and reads to/from
modifiables are shown as red (long-dashed) and green (short-dashed) arrows respectively.
A note on randomness. We require that all algorithms implemented in our framework be deterministic.
That is, given some input, if re-executed they must produce exactly the same output. It is still possible,
and indeed we have several in our application examples, to implement randomized algorithms. To do so,
the randomness must simply be pre-generated before executing the computation to ensure that, when reexecuted, the same results will be obtained.
Example. To illustrate our framework, we give an implementation of a parallel divide-and-conquer sum
function. See Algorithm 1. Note that in our pseudocode, for readability, we denote reads using the syntax:
with read(mods...) as args... do f (args...)
This computation is static in the sense that regardless of updates, the RSP tree will always look the same.
In general, our system supports arbitrary changes, even if they lead to wildly different trees.
Algorithm 1 Parallel self-adjusting sum
1: function Sum(A[lo...hi] : int mod array, res : int mod)
2:
if lo = hi - 1 then
3:
with read(A[lo]) as x do
4:
write(res, x)
5:
else
6:
local mid ← lo + (hi - lo) / 2
7:
local left res ← alloc mod(int)
8:
local right res ← alloc mod(int)
9:
par(function ⇒ Sum(A[lo...mid], left res),
function ⇒ Sum(A[mid...hi], right res))
10:
with read(left res, right res) as x, y do
11:
write(res, x + y)

3

Change Propagation Algorithm

We use a variant of SP trees (see introduction) extended with read (R) nodes, which we call RSP trees. A
read is tracked in the RSP tree by creating an R node as the left child of the current S node whenever a reader
is executed. The reader code then executes in the subtree of the R node and the subsequent continuation
proceeds in the sibling node. The full semantics for RSP trees for any given computation is defined by the
algorithms in this section.
Figure 2 shows an example RSP tree for the divide-and-conquer sum computation of Algorithm 1 on an
input of size four. We use green (short-dashed) arrows to show which read nodes read from which modifiables,
and red (long-dashed nodes) to indicate which sequential computations wrote to which modifiables. The

5

four R nodes lowest in the tree correspond to the reads of the input, which occur at the base case of the
algorithm. The R nodes higher in the tree are the reads of the results of the recursive calls.
Our framework facilitates self-adjusting computation by first building the RSP tree during the initial
run of the static algorithm. To execute dynamic updates, when a modifiable is written to, all of the read
nodes that read from it, and all of their ancestors in the RSP tree are marked as pending re-execution.
Change propagation then simply consists in traversing the RSP tree, ignoring paths which are not marked,
since no changes are present, and re-executing the marked readers. Note that this re-execution destroys the
old portion of the RSP tree corresponding to the read and generates a new one, meaning that the old and
new computations can be entirely structurally different. Additionally, such re-execution may also write to
subsequent modifiables that were also read during the computation, so this process may mark additional
nodes in the tree as pending re-execution, which will cause further propagation. The remainder of this
section discusses the high-level implementation of these operations and the framework’s primitives.
Pseudocode for the key components of our algorithm is shown in Algorithms 2–5. In the code, current scope is a thread-local variable pointing to the current S node of the RSP tree that the code is running
in.
Maintaining this notion of scope is important for two reasons. Most obviously, it ensures that the RSP
tree can be constructed while the algorithm is ran. Less obviously, and more interestingly, it also allows us
to more efficiently allocate and collect dynamically allocated modifiables.
Writing to modifiables. Pseudocode for writing to modifiables is given in Algorithm 2. If the new value
differs from the old value, all of the readers of that modifiable must be marked to trigger change propagation.
Algorithm 2 Writing modifiables
1: function write(dest : α mod, value: α)
2:
if dest is unwritten or value 6= dest.val then
3:
dest.val ← value
4:
for each reader in dest.readers do in parallel
5:
reader.affected ← true
6:
reader.mark()

Reading modifiables. Pseudocode for the core read operation and for handling R nodes is shown in
Algorithm 3. R nodes consist of two specific fields, the list of modifiables that were read (mods), and the
reader function that executes on the values of the modifiables (reader f). When an R node is created or
destroyed, it adds or removes itself from the corresponding modifiables’ list of readers respectively. Note
that this operation needs to happen atomically. We will discuss how we implement this in Section 5. Lastly,
for added efficiency, we note that the size of the RSP tree can be reduced by creating the continuation S
node (Line 6) lazily, so that it will be omitted if there is no subsequent computation.
Algorithm 3 Reading modifiables
1: function read(m : (α1 mod, ..., αk mod), r : α1 × ... × αk 7→ ())
2:
local cur ← current scope
3:
cur.left ← new R node (m, r)
4:
current scope ← cur.left
5:
cur.left.do read()
6:
cur.right ← new S node
7:
current scope ← cur.right
8: function R::create(m, r)
9:
this.mods ← m
10:
this.reader f ← r
11:
for each mod v in mods do in parallel
12:
v.readers ← v.readers ∪{this}
// must be atomic!
13: function R::do read
14:
local m1 , ..., mk ← this.mods
15:
local v1 , ..., vk ← m1 .val, ..., mk .val
16:
this.reader f(v1 , ..., vk )
17: function R::destroy
18:
for each mod m in this.mods do
19:
m.readers ← m.readers \ {this}
// must be atomic!

6

Parallelism. The par function creates a P node as the left child of the current scope. The P node has two
S nodes as children, which will correspond to the scope of the two computations that run in parallel. After
completing the parallel computation, an S node is created as the right child of the current node to be the
scope of any subsequent computation. The algorithm is shown in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 Parallelism
1: function par(left f: () 7→ () , right f: () 7→ ())
2:
local cur ← current scope
3:
cur.left ← new P node
4:
cur.left.left ← new S node
5:
cur.left.right ← new S node
6:
in parallel do:
7:
{ current scope ← cur.left.left; left f() }
8:
{ current scope ← cur.left.right; right f() }
9:
cur.right ← new S node
10:
current scope ← cur.right

Control operations. These are depicted in Algorithm 5. Run creates the root S node of the RSP tree
and runs the computation from scratch. The propagate functions perform change propagation for each of
the kind of RSP tree nodes. Note that the P version propagates in parallel, and the S version sequentially.
When reaching a read node, the algorithm reruns the associated reader function.
Algorithm 5 Control operations
1: function run(f : () 7→ ()) : S
2:
local root ← new S node
3:
current scope ← root
4:
f ()
5:
return root
6: function propagate(root : S)
7:
if root.marked then root.propagate()
8: function node::mark
9:
this.marked ← true
10:
if this.parent 6= ⊥ ∧ ¬ this.parent.marked then
11:
this.parent.mark()
12: function S::propagate
13:
if this.left 6= ⊥ ∧ this.left.marked then
14:
this.left.propagate()
15:
if this.right 6= ⊥ ∧ this.right.marked then
16:
this.right.propagate()
17:
this.marked ← false
18: function P ::propagate
19:
if this.left.marked ∧ this.right.marked then
20:
in parallel do:
21:
this.left.propagate()
22:
this.right.propagate()
23:
else if this.left.marked then this.left.propagate()
24:
else this.right.propagate()
25:
this.marked ← false
26: function R::propagate
27:
if this.affected then
28:
this.left ← ⊥
29:
this.right ← ⊥
30:
this.do read()
31:
this.affected ← false
32:
else
33:
if this.left 6= ⊥ ∧ this.left.marked then
34:
this.left.propagate()
35:
if this.right 6= ⊥ ∧ this.right.marked then
36:
this.right.propagate()
37:
this.marked ← false

7

4

Analysis

In this section, we provide an analysis of our model to establish its correctness and prove bounds on the
runtimes of our algorithms. Bounds in our analysis will depend on the work and span of the underlying
algorithm, as well as the height of the generated RSP tree, which we note is at most the span of the algorithm,
but can be much less. For all of our examples, it is at most O(log(n)), even when the span of the algorithm
is larger.
Setting. For our analysis, we will consider algorithms A in our parallel self-adjusting framework, which can
be thought of as functions which act on given inputs I = {(m, v)}, a set of modifiable-value pairs consisting
of modifiables that A will read, and their values. Executing A(I) results in an output (τ, T ), where state
τ = {(m, v)} denotes that for each (m, v) ∈ τ , A wrote the value v to the modifiable m. T is the RSP tree of
the computation, where each read node is annotated with the reader function and the values that were read.
We define the domain of a set of pairs X by dom(X) = {m : (m, v) ∈ X}. Due to the write-once restriction,
note that in a valid execution, we must have dom(I) ∩ dom(τ ) = ∅.
We can then define a dynamic update ∆ = (I, I 0 ) to be a pair of input states with I 6= I 0 , denoting that
the input is changed from I to I 0 , which may involve changing the values of modifiables in I, adding new
modifiables that were not read the first time, and removing modifiables that are no longer read. We can
then think of change propagation as taking an RSP tree T and a dynamic update (I, I 0 ), and outputting a
set of writes τ and an updated RSP tree T 0 .
We can now define the notion of affected readers, which, intuitively, when applying an algorithm to two
different inputs, are readers that exist in both versions of the computation but read different values, i.e. they
are the frontiers at which the computations diverge.
Definition 4.1 (Affected readers). Consider an algorithm A, two input states I and I 0 , and their corresponding RSP trees T and T 0 , i.e., A(I) = (τ, T ) and A(I 0 ) = (τ 0 , T 0 ) for some τ and τ 0 . We say that a read
node is subsumed by another read node in the same tree if the first one is in the subtree of the second one.
i.e., the first one was created while executing the second one’s computation. Given two read nodes v ∈ T
and v 0 ∈ T 0 , we say that they are cognates if the paths in T and T 0 to v and v 0 are the same, that is, the
path branches left or right at the same time and have the same labels. We call a pair of cognate read nodes
affected if they read different values, and are not subsumed by another such node.
Note that this definition of affected node makes sense because of the fact that computations in our framework
are deterministic, and hence, the only place at which a computation can begin to differ is at a read node
that reads different values than last time. We now introduce the notion of computation distance. The
computation distance models the amount of work required to re-execute the affected readers. In essence, it
is the minimum amount of work required to update the computation assuming absolutely no overhead.
Definition 4.2. Consider an algorithm A, two input states I and I 0 , and their corresponding RSP trees T
and T 0 . Define the cost of a read node to be the work performed by its reader function3 . The computation
distance between the executions of A on the inputs I and I 0 is defined as the sum of the costs of the affected
read nodes in T and T 0 . More formally, if we denote by l(T ), v(T ), w(T ), the RSP label of the root node of
T , the values read by the read node at the root of T , and the work performed by the reader function of the
read node at the root of T , we can define the computation distance recursively as follows.
(
w(T ) + w(T 0 ) if l(T ) = R ∧ v(T ) 6= v(T 0 ),
0
δ(T, T ) = Pk
0
i=1 δ(Ti , Ti ) otherwise,
where Ti denotes the ith subtree of T .
Observe that due to determinism, the definition of computation distance will only consider cognate nodes
T, T 0 which must have the same number of children/subtrees. We are now ready to state the correctness
theorem of our framework.
3 The work performed by the reader function is considered to be the work that it would perform when executed without

self-adjusting computation, i.e., assuming that reads and writes take constant time.

8

Theorem 4.1 (Correctness). Consider an algorithm A and an input state I where A(I) = (τ, T ). Let
∆ = (I, I 0 ), where A(I 0 ) = (τ 0 , T 0 ), denote a dynamic update to the input. Then, applying change propagation
to the RSP tree T with dynamic update ∆ yields
1. writes τ 00 such that τ 0 ⊆ τ 00 ∪ {(m, v) ∈ τ | m 6∈ dom(τ 00 )},
2. the RSP tree T 0 .
Proof sketch. Proving the correctness of change propagation essentially relies on establishing two facts: that
it visits and re-executes all affected read nodes, and that re-executing just the affected read nodes is sufficient.
The fact that all affected read nodes are re-executed can be established inductively on the sequential
dependencies of the affected readers. The earliest affected reader must read a modifiable that exists in I
and I 0 but has a different value, and hence will be marked in the RSP tree and will be re-executed. An
affected reader that has had all of its sequential dependencies re-executed must be marked since it either
reads a modifiable that exists in I and I 0 but has a different value, or it reads a modifiable that is written
earlier in the computation. In the second case, since computations are deterministic, the modifiable must
be written inside a reader whose input has changed, and hence is an affected reader which has already been
re-executed.
Establishing that re-executing all affected readers writes to all modifiables whose values in τ 0 are different
than in τ follows from determinism and the write-once restriction. Determinism implies that all differing
writes must occur inside an affected reader, and the write-once restriction ensures that these writes exist in
τ 0 . Lastly, the fact that the RSP tree is updated to T 0 follows from determinism.
Proof sketch of Theorem 1.1. Since there are O(R∆ ) affected readers, it costs at most O(R∆ · h) work to
traverse the RSP tree to reach each of them. The work required to re-execute all affected readers and destroy
their old RSP subtrees is O(W∆ ) by definition, plus any overhead encountered from maintaining modifiables’
reader sets and marking ancestors when performing the write primitive. We can argue that these overheads
can be reduced to constant or amortized. To reduce the maintenance of reader sets to constant overhead,
the algorithm can maintain each modifiable’s reader set as a hashtable. To avoid issues of concurrency and
resizing, insertions and deletions (Lines 12 and 19 in Algorithm 3) can be deferred and performed in batch
after change propagation is complete. The overhead of write can be amortized by noticing that for all
marked nodes, they will either be traversed by change propagation, or destroyed by a re-execution.
Lastly, we consider how these overheads affect the span of the algorithm. Each write operation takes
up to h time, and each read may require a hashtable operation that takes up to log(r) time w.h.p, where r
is the size of the reader set. However, h ≥ log(r) and hence the overhead is at most h per operation w.h.p.,
leading to a total span of O(s · h) w.h.p.
It is worth noting that the randomness in our bounds comes purely from the use of hashtables to store the
reader sets. For algorithms in which each modifiable has only a constant number of readers, which is very
often the case, the bounds can therefore be made deterministic.
Analyzing the computation distance of algorithms. To obtain bounds for dynamic updates on particular algorithms implemented in our framework, it suffices to analyze the number of affected reads and
the computation distance for the desired class of updates (and the span of the algorithm which is usually
already known). Here, we will sketch an analysis of the sum algorithm from Algorithm 1.
Theorem 4.2. Consider Algorithm 1 on an input A of n modifiables, and a dynamic update in which the
values of k modifiables are changed. The number of affected reads and the computation distance induced by
such an update is O(k log(1 + n/k)).
Proof sketch. Note that the algorithm performs log(n) levels of recursion. We count separately the number
of affected reads that occur during the first log(k) levels and those that occur after. During the first
log(k) levels, since the algorithm performs binary recursion, there can be no more than O(2log(k) ) = O(k)
reads in total, affected or not. The k updated modifiables will affect k of the base-case reads on Line 3.
The corresponding writes on Line 4 then affect up to k reads on Line 10 from the calling functions. The
writes on Line 11 then affect up to k reads from their callers, and so on. The final log(n/k) levels of
recursion therefore account for at most k log(n/k) affected readers. Therefore, in total, there can be at most
O(k + k log(n/k)) = O(k log(1 + n/k)) affected readers, each of which performs O(1) work.
9

In [2], several algorithms, including list contraction and tree contraction, which also appear in our benchmarks, had their computation distance analyzed in the round-synchronous model. The round-synchronous
model can be implemented in our framework, and hence it is straightforward to translate these analyses to
bounds our framework.
Overhead of self-adjusting computation. In addition to the cost of dynamic updates, we can also
discuss the overhead of the initial computation. Note that each node in the RSP tree corresponds to at least
one primitive operation, and hence the cost of the building the tree and later destroying it can be charged to
the computation. Then, just as in change propagation, the overhead of the read and write primitives are
either constant, or can be amortized (see the Proof sketch of Theorem 1.1), leading to constant amortized
overhead.
Lastly, we remark on the memory usage. The two sources of memory overhead come from the RSP tree
and modifiables. In the worst case, the size of the RSP tree is proportional to the work of the algorithm.
However, for any sensible algorithm, both strands of any parallel fork will contain at least one read (if they
do not, the parallel fork was unnecessary). Therefore, under this assumption, the size of the SP tree is
proportional to the number of reads in the algorithm. Since the memory overhead of modifiables (their
reader sets) is also proportional to the number of reads, the additional memory overhead is just proportional
to the number of reads.
Work-efficiency of change propagation. By definition, re-executing a set of affected readers of computation distance W∆ must take O(W∆ ) work. Based on Theorem 1.1, we therefore consider the work overhead
of change propagation to be R∆ · h. This means that if W∆ ≥ R∆ · h, i.e, each affected reader performs at
least h work on average, then change propagation essentially has just constant-time overhead. In practice,
this suggests that good granularity control is important for writing efficient self-adjusting algorithms.
Comparison to sequential self-adjusting computation. The best sequential algorithms for selfadjusting computation [6] can propagate an update of computation distance W∆ in O(W∆ log(W∆ )) work.
Compared to our bounds, which are at most O(W∆ ·h), the difference is a log(W∆ ) versus h. Given a parallel
algorithm on input size n with polylog(n) span, we have h ≤ polylog(n). However, often, and for every example we studied, h is just log(n), even for algorithms with larger span. Therefore at worst, our algorithm is
O(polylog(n)) slower than the best sequential algorithm, but in the common case, just O(log(n)/ log(W∆ ))
slower.

5

Implementation

To study its practical performance, we implemented our framework as a library for C++. For parallelism, we
use the work-stealing scheduler from the Parlay library [15]. For memory allocation, we use jemalloc [22] in
addition to Parlay’s pool-based memory allocator. In this section, we discuss some of the interesting aspects
of the implementation of the system, and note some useful optimizations.
Reader set implementation. One interesting part of the system is handling the reader sets of modifiables. Since multiple concurrently executing threads may read the same modifiable, it is important that
modifications to this set are thread-safe. To obtain our theoretical bounds, we describe the algorithm using
a hashtable. In practice, however, we observe that the majority of modifiables in self-adjusting algorithms
have just a small constant number of readers, often just one. We therefore implement the reader sets with
a hybrid data structure that stores a single reader inline with no heap allocation when there is only one
reader. When the number of readers becomes more than one, the reader set atomically converts itself into a
linked data structure. We used a linked list for algorithms with small reader sets, and a randomized binary
search tree for algorithms with larger reader sets.
Our binary search tree uses the hashes of the addresses of the reader nodes as the random keys. To insert
a new reader into the tree, our algorithms attempts to insert it into the appropriate leaf of the tree using
an atomic compare-and-swap (CAS) operation. If the CAS succeeds, the insertion is successful. Otherwise,
note that the correct location for the key must be a child of the node that instead won the CAS, so our
algorithm proceeds down and tries again. To simplify deletions, rather than deleting from the tree eagerly,
nodes that need to be removed are simply marked as dead, and removed during the next traversal.
To ensure thread safety, we have to make sure that operations on the reader sets that might race are
safe. Note that insertions correspond to reads, traversals correspond to writes, and deletions correspond to
10

the cleanup of destroyed subtrees after a computation is re-executed. Insertions will therefore never race
with traversals since reads and writes to the same modifiable can not race in a valid self-adjusting program.
Deletions may however race with traversals or insertions since the cleanup of an RSP subtree may take
place while another re-computation is occurring. One way to mitigate any potential problems is to defer
all destructions of RSP subtrees until a later garbage-collection phase, rather than performing them during
change propagation. Lastly, multiple traversals can not race due to the write-once condition, but multiple
insertions or deletions can. Our algorithm is safe with respect to concurrent insertions, and our lazy deletion
strategy makes concurrent deletions safe.
Garbage collection. Rather than eagerly deleting subtrees of the RSP tree when a reader is re-executed,
we instead move such subtrees off to a garbage pile which we collect after performing change propagation.
This simplifies the destruction of subtrees since doing so naively can very easily lead to race conditions. For
example, if performing eager deletion, it is possible that while a subtree is being collected, a concurrent
computation causes one of its R nodes to be marked, which could lead to marking a node that has already
been deleted.
Supporting dynamically sized inputs. Modifiables give us the ability to easily write algorithms that
support updating the values in the input and propagating the results. In many situations, we also want
to support the ability to add/remove elements to/from the input. In sequential self-adjusting computation,
this is achieved by using linked lists to represent the input. In the parallel setting, we can achieve similar
results by representing the input as a balanced binary tree. The trick is to use modifiables to represent the
parent/children relationships in the tree so that if a new element is inserted, this will cause an update of a
child modifiable and allow change propagation to update the computation with the new element.

6

Benchmarks and Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the practical performance of our system. We implemented six benchmarks,
exhibiting a range of different characteristics and providing different insights into the quality of the proposed
algorithms.
Experimental setup. We ran our experiments on a 4-socket AMD machine with 32 physical cores in total,
each running at 2.4 GHz, with 2-way hyperthreading, a 6MB L3 cache per socket, and 200 GB of main
memory. All of our code was compiled using Clang 9 with optimization level -O3. Each experiment was run
using 1 – 64 worker threads in increasing powers of two. We used the Google Benchmark C++ library to
measure the speed (in real/wall time) of each benchmark. We run each benchmark ten times and take the
average running time.
Benchmark setup. Each benchmark consists of four parts. First, we run a static sequential program
and a static parallel program that implement the same algorithm to the self-adjusting one but without any
overhead from self-adjusting computation. We then benchmark the parallel self-adjusting program, both
on its initial computation, and on performing dynamic updates with change propagation. For each of the
examples, we use varying batch update sizes to measure the effect that batch sizes have on the amount of
parallelism exhibited by the update, and the amount of work required to propagate it. We do not include
the time taken to perform garbage collection in the measurements.
We hoped to experimentally compare our results to those of [18], but their code is not publicly available,
and we were unable, despite our efforts, to obtain it.
Reporting of results. For each benchmark, we provide numerical results in Tables 1–6, which show the
running times of the static sequential algorithm (Seq), parallel static algorithm (Parallel Static), the initial
computation of the self-adjusting algorithm (PSAC Compute), and the dynamic updates (PSAC Update),
for 1 processor (1), 32 processors (32), and 32 processors with hyperthreading (32ht). For each of the
parallel algorithms, we compute the self-speedup (SU), which is the relative improvement of the 32 or 32ht
performance (whichever is better) compared to the 1 processor performance. For each example, we measure
the performance for some fixed input size n and varying batch update sizes k.
For the dynamic updates, we measure work savings (WS), which is the relative improvement of their 1
processor performance compared to the static sequential algorithm. Finally, we report the total speedup,
which is the relative performance of the dynamic updates with 32 or 32ht processors compared to the static

11

sequential algorithm (equivalently, the product of the speedup and the work savings). This allows us to
measure separately, the benefits due to parallelism (the SU), the benefits due to dynamism (the WS), and
their total combined benefit (Total).
Applications. We implemented the following benchmarks.
• Spellcheck: Computes the minimum edit distance of a set of one million strings to a target string.
• Raytracer: Renders a 2000×2000 pixel scene consisting of three reflective balls using a simple ray tracing
method.
• String Hash: Computes the Rabin-Karp fingerprint (hash) of a one-hundred-million character string.
• Dynamic Sequence: Computes a list contraction of a linked list of length one million.
• Dynamic Trees: Computes a tree contraction of a tree on one million nodes.
• Filter: Filters the elements of a BST with respect to a given predicate, returning a new BST.

6.1

Results

The results of our experiments are depicted in Tables 1–6.
The initial run. We are interested in the overhead of the initial run. This is the ratio of the runtime
of the self-adjusting algorithm compared to the sequential baseline. Prior work on sequential self-adjusting
computation [3] observed overheads ranging from 1.9 to 29 depending on the application.
The overhead of the initial run varies with the problem and the granularity of the work performed by
the readers. For the spellcheck benchmark, the overhead is negligible since each of the readers performs
a relatively expensive edit distance computation, completely hiding the overhead of the framework. For
algorithms with smaller granularity, such as the Rabin-Karp benchmark, we observe work overheads of
around 1.7. The filter algorithm also uses a similar granularity, and hence experiences similarly low overhead.
On the other hand, the raytracing algorithm involves modifiables with a large number of readers, so the
work overhead is higher, at around a factor of 4.6. The list contraction and tree contraction benchmarks
both perform O(log(n)) rounds of computation, with dependency chains spanning across them, and hence
have larger overheads of 5.8 and 7.3.
Work savings. Work savings measure the relative improvement in runtime from using self-adjusting
computation to perform an update compared to running the algorithm from scratch. As was the case for
the work overhead, the work savings are dependent on the granularity of the work performed by the readers.
Of course, the work savings are also heavily dependent on the size of the update relative to the size of the
entire input. For small updates, the work savings range from 770 when updating one element of one million
elements (list contraction) to 819k when updating one of one million strings (edit distance). The work
savings for the raytracer benchmark are also very encouraging. For the given dynamic update, a total of
6.25% of the image needed to be updated, but the change propagation algorithm performed approximately
4% of the work required to recompute from scratch. For benchmarks with varying update sizes, the work
savings gradually decrease as the update size increases. It is interesting to look at the crossover point where
from-scratch execution becomes more efficient than change propagation.
For benchmarks like spellcheck, which perform heavy work at the reads, from-scratch execution does
not outperform change propagation until updating the entire input. For modest-granularity benchmarks
like hashing, from-scratch execution wins when the update size reaches k = 106 for sequential execution, or
k = 105 for parallel execution, on an initial input of size n = 108 . For tree contraction and list contraction,
the crossover points occur at k = 104 out of n = 106 elements for both sequential and parallel execution.
For filter, the crossover point occurs at roughly k = 105 out of n = 107 elements. In general, crossovers tend
to occur a couple of orders of magnitude before the input size.
Speedup. The initial runs of our algorithms all benefit, often substantially, from parallelism. On 32 hyperthreaded cores (64 threads), spellcheck and hashing experience parallel speedups of 49-50x. Raytracing
achieves 42x, and list contraction, tree contraction, and filter speed up 19-20x.

12

n
106

1t
36.21s

n
106

1t
36.89s

k
100
101
102
103
104
105
106

1t
44us
445us
4.36ms
44ms
436ms
4.04s
37.67s

Static Algorithm
32ht
SU
908ms
39.84
PSAC Initial Run
32t
32ht
SU
1.20s
750ms
49.16
PSAC Dynamic Update
32t
32ht
SU
45us
47us
0.98
90us
112us
4.93
265us
208us
20.92
2.03ms
1.20ms
36.97
19ms
11ms
37.46
167ms
118ms
34.08
1.81s
1.21s
31.04
32t
1.19s

Seq Baseline
36.72s

WS
819.6k
82.42k
8.41k
827.9
84.18
9.10
0.97

T
800.4k
406.7k
176.0k
30.61k
3.15k
310.2
30.26

Table 1: Benchmark results for Spellcheck.

n
-

1t
2.46s

n
-

1t
13.65s

k
-

1t
112ms

Static Algorithm
32ht
SU
49ms
49.32
PSAC Initial Run
32t
32ht
SU
520ms
323ms
42.24
PSAC Dynamic Update
32t
32ht
SU
8.66ms
7.47ms
15.08
32t
80ms

Seq Baseline
2.54s

WS
26.44

T
398.8

Table 2: Benchmark results for Raytracer.

n
108

1t
1.86s

n
108

1t
3.05s

k
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108

1t
14us
134us
1.26ms
12ms
103ms
621ms
2.49s
5.21s
19.47s

Static Algorithm
32ht
SU
31ms
58.34
PSAC Initial Run
32t
32ht
SU
96ms
61ms
49.81
PSAC Dynamic Update
32t
32ht
SU
16us
16us
0.90
66us
74us
2.02
162us
122us
10.35
717us
512us
25.17
4.63ms
3.11ms
33.16
26ms
18ms
34.20
108ms
66ms
37.27
213ms
132ms
39.30
709ms
472ms
41.24
32t
58ms

Table 3: Benchmark results for String Hash.

13

Seq Baseline
1.72s

WS
118.8k
12.81k
1.36k
133.3
16.68
2.77
0.69
0.33
0.09

T
107.1k
25.86k
14.10k
3.36k
553.0
94.76
25.73
12.99
3.65

n
106

1t
647ms

n
106

1t
4.32s

k
100
101
102
103
104
105
106

1t
761us
5.58ms
31ms
201ms
1.26s
5.11s
8.45s

Static Algorithm
32ht
SU
73ms
8.77
PSAC Initial Run
32t
32ht
SU
219ms
464ms
19.66
PSAC Dynamic Update
32t
32ht
SU
629us
736us
1.21
1.65ms
1.97ms
3.38
3.31ms
2.95ms
10.69
14ms
10ms
18.53
74ms
53ms
23.33
263ms
195ms
26.15
624ms
492ms
17.14
32t
70ms

Seq Baseline
586ms

WS
770.2
105.2
18.62
2.91
0.47
0.11
0.07

T
931.0
355.2
199.0
53.94
10.89
3.00
1.19

Table 4: Benchmark results for Dynamic Sequence.

n
106

1t
915ms

n
106

1t
4.85s

k
100
101
102
103
104
105
106

1t
698us
3.28ms
24ms
210ms
1.47s
5.19s
8.59s

Static Algorithm
32ht
SU
66ms
13.85
PSAC Initial Run
32t
32ht
SU
242ms
689ms
20.02
PSAC Dynamic Update
32t
32ht
SU
584us
672us
1.19
1.04ms
1.23ms
3.14
2.29ms
2.18ms
11.03
12ms
10ms
20.46
79ms
60ms
24.33
254ms
173ms
29.85
428ms
306ms
28.00
32t
85ms

Seq Baseline
824ms

WS
1.18k
251.7
34.23
3.93
0.56
0.16
0.10

T
1.41k
789.4
377.7
80.33
13.68
4.74
2.69

Table 5: Benchmark results for Dynamic Trees.

n
107

1t
361ms

n
107

1t
630ms

k
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107

1t
36us
275us
2.74ms
25ms
143ms
543ms
1.04s
2.12s

Static Algorithm
32ht
SU
15ms
23.09
PSAC Initial Run
32t
32ht
SU
35ms
31ms
20.27
PSAC Dynamic Update
32t
32ht
SU
109us
128us
0.33
242us
298us
1.14
1.39ms
1.25ms
2.19
3.73ms
3.69ms
6.95
9.96ms
8.18ms
17.50
31ms
23ms
22.97
80ms
55ms
18.76
198ms
159ms
13.28
32t
17ms

Table 6: Benchmark results for Filter.

14

Seq Baseline
262ms

WS
13.20k
1.73k
173.6
18.56
3.32
0.88
0.46
0.22

T
4.36k
1.96k
380.9
129.1
58.19
20.13
8.61
2.98

In addition to the initial run, updates also benefit from parallelism, particularly as the update sizes
increases. Although there is little potential for parallelism for k = 1 updates, each benchmark exhibits
speedups ranging from 22-39x for larger update sizes. At the crossover points, where change propagation
is still competitive with from-scratch execution, speedups range from 22-34x. This further supports the
notion that parallelism and self-adjusting computation are highly complementary methods. Self-adjusting
computation leads to substantial savings for small update sizes, and parallelism provides strong speedups for
larger update sizes. For moderate update sizes, both are effective and their benefits combine to yield good
total performance improvements.
Tree size and memory usage. The RSP tree size, and hence the memory overhead of a self-adjusting
algorithm depends heavily on the granularity at which the data is stored and processed. Table 7 shows
the RSP tree sizes and memory usage of each of our benchmarks at their default granularity. For most
algorithms, the memory overhead ranges between 1-7x the input size, which is consistent with prior work
on sequential self-adjusting computation [3]. The outliers are our list contraction and tree contraction
benchmarks, which use substantially more memory because they perform O(n log(n)) work over O(log(n))
rounds of computation, all of which is represented in the RSP tree, essentially leading to the tree size being
an additional factor of log(n) larger than the input. A more sophisticated implementation of these algorithms
could achieve O(n) work by using compaction on the set of live nodes at each round. This could reduce their
memory footprint, and would be interesting to explore in future work.
Benchmark
Spellcheck
Raytracer
String Hash
Sequence
Tree
Filter

Problem size
106 strings
8M pixels
108 chars
106 elems
106 nodes
107 elems

Input memory
80MB
192MB
100MB
20MB
20MB
200MB

Tree size
6M
24M
9.4M
33M
18.8M
2.48M

Memory
312MB
1.3GB
462.5MB
1.96GB
1.3GB
193MB

Table 7: RSP tree sizes and the amount of memory consumed by the RSP tree for each benchmark problem.
The cost of garbage collection. When a self-adjusting computation is discarded, the resulting RSP
tree must be destroyed, which also entails removing its read nodes from the reader sets of any modifiables
that they read. Table 8 shows the runtime of garbage collection for each of the RSP trees for our six
benchmark problems compared to the performance of the initial run. Note that for all of the problems other
than Raytracer, garbage collection time is at least a factor of 500 less than the actual computation. For
Raytracer, garbage collection is slightly more costly since it has many readers per modifiable and hence has
to pay the cost of deletion from the reader sets. Even then, garbage collection takes less than 1% of the time
of the initial run.
Benchmark
Spellcheck
Raytracer
String Hash
Sequence
Tree
Filter

Initial Run
750ms
323ms
61ms
464ms
242ms
31ms

Garbage Collection (32ht)
158us
1.99ms
101us
437us
493us
31us

Table 8: The cost of garbage collection for each benchmark problem. The initial run is the performance on
32 threads or 32 hyperthreads, whichever is better.

6.2

Additional experiments

Finally, we perform two additional small experiments that measure the effect that data granularity and the
sizes of reader sets have on the overall performance of self-adjusting computation.
Granularity tradeoffs. An important consideration when implementing parallel algorithms is careful control of granularity. This is perhaps even more true when implementing self-adjusting algorithms, since the
15

granularity of the data and the functions executed by readers will directly influence the size of the RSP tree
and the overhead of modifiables. A larger granularity will lead to lower work and memory overheads. The
tradeoff, however, is that if the granularity is too large, updates will slow down, since more irrelevant information will be recomputed when a small piece of the input is updated. Here, we will explore the performance
implications and tradeoffs that come from tuning the granularity of our string hashing benchmark. Results
are shown in Table 9.
Granularity

Memory

16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048

1.85GB
925MB
462.5MB
231.25MB
115.63MB
57.81MB
28.79MB
14.45MB

Run
p=1
6.8s
4.11s
3.03s
2.5s
2.3s
2.1s
2.0s
2.0s

Update
k=1
17us
15us
14us
14us
15us
18us
24us
39us

Run
p = 32ht
158ms
95ms
62ms
44ms
34ms
31ms
29ms
28ms

Update
k = 104
4ms
3.64ms
3.12ms
3.04ms
2.88ms
2.83ms
3.68ms
5.79ms

Table 9: Memory usage, initial run speed and update speed for various granularities in the hashing benchmark
with size n = 108 . Memory denotes memory used by the RSP tree.
As expected, the memory usage and work overhead decreases monotonically as the granularity is increased.
The more interesting aspect to look at is the update performance. Note that it is not necessarily the case
that the smallest granularity will lead to the fastest updates. Although a smaller granularity means less
redundant data is read and recomputed, it also leads to larger RSP trees, which might negate the benefit.
The optimal granularity for update speed will therefore be one that balances the tradeoff between reading
data and reducing the RSP tree size. For our string hashing benchmark, we observe that the optimal tradeoff
occurs at a granularity of 128 characters for single character (k = 1) updates, and at 512 characters for larger
(k = 104 ) updates. This phenomena is explainable by cache line reads.
Impact of reader-set size. Most self-adjusting computations, including all but one of our benchmarks,
only have a constant number of readers (often just one) per modifiable. The raytracer benchmark illustrates
the effect of having a large number of readers per modifiable, exhibiting a lesser speedup compared to most
of the others. Here, we present a small microbenchmark that examines the performance impact of varying
the number of readers of a modifiable. In Table 10, we depict the results of experiment in which 106 workers
in parallel each read from a random modifiable and write its value to a unique output destination. We vary
the number of modifiables to observe the effect on performance.
# Mods
1
10
102
103
104
105
106

Readers/Mod
106
105
104
103
102
10
1

Run
55.1ms
48.9ms
47.2ms
46.5ms
45.1ms
38.4ms
27.8ms

Update
191ms
183ms
163ms
130ms
57.5ms
57.0ms
44.3ms

Table 10: Runtime of the reader-set size microbenchmark for varying numbers of input modifiables. Run
denotes the runtime of the initial run, and Update denotes the runtime of a making a dynamic update to
every modifiable.
We observe that for the initial run (the Run column), the performance is only marginally impacted as the
number of readers per mod varies from 10 to 106 . The exception is when there is only one expected reader
per mod, in which case the performance is up to twice as fast as the 106 reader case. This is because of
the optimization we perform in which modifiables with a single reader store that reader inline instead of
allocating a linked data structure. We measure the effect on updates (the Update column) by changing
the value of all of the modifiables and propagating the result. We observe that when varying from 10 to 106
16

reads per modifiable, performance is at most a factor of four slower, or a factor of five slower compared to
the one reader case.

7

Conclusion

In this work, we designed, analyzed, and implemented a system for parallel self-adjusting computation. We
showed that a small set of primitives is sufficient to express self-adjusting programs that can exploit arbitrary
nested parallelism. Compared to previous work, this is the first such system with theoretical bounds on the
runtime of the updates. Our experiments show that the system is capable of producing dynamic algorithms
that both vastly outperform their static counterparts when performing small to moderately sized updates,
and scale well on multiprocessor machines.

Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous referees for their comments and suggestions. We also thank Laxman Dhulipala for
many useful discussions and for providing valuable guidance. This research was supported by NSF grants
CCF-1901381, CCF-1910030, and CCF-1919223.

17

References
[1] U. A. Acar. Self-Adjusting Computation. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, May 2005.
[2] U. A. Acar, D. Anderson, G. E. Blelloch, L. Dhulipala, and S. Westrick. Parallel batch-dynamic trees
via change propagation. In European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), 2020.
[3] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, M. Blume, R. Harper, and K. Tangwongsan. An experimental analysis of
self-adjusting computation. ACM Trans. Prog. Lang. Syst., 32(1):1–53, 2009.
[4] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, and R. Harper. Adaptive functional programming. In ACM Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), 2002.
[5] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, and R. Harper. Selective memoization. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual
ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), 2003.
[6] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, R. Harper, J. L. Vittes, and S. L. M. Woo. Dynamizing static algorithms,
with applications to dynamic trees and history independence. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
Algorithms (SODA), 2004.
[7] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, R. Ley-Wild, K. Tangwongsan, and D. Türkoğlu. Traceable data types for
self-adjusting computation. In Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2010.
[8] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, K. Tangwongsan, and D. Türkoğlu. Robust kinetic convex hulls in 3D. In
European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), Sept. 2008.
[9] U. A. Acar, G. E. Blelloch, K. Tangwongsan, and J. L. Vittes. Kinetic algorithms via self-adjusting
computation. In European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), 2006.
[10] U. A. Acar, B. Hudson, and D. Türkoğlu. Kinetic mesh-refinement in 2D. In SCG ’11: Proceedings of
the 27th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, 2011.
[11] U. A. Acar, A. Ihler, R. Mettu, and O. Sümer. Adaptive Bayesian inference. In Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS), 2007.
[12] P. Bhatotia, P. Fonseca, U. A. Acar, B. B. Brandenburg, and R. Rodrigues. ithreads: A threading
library for parallel incremental computation. In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, pages 645–659, 2015.
[13] P. Bhatotia, A. Wieder, R. Rodrigues, U. A. Acar, and R. Pasquin. Incoop: Mapreduce for incremental
computations. In ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC), 2011.
[14] G. E. Blelloch. Programming parallel algorithms. Commun. ACM, 39(3), Mar. 1996.
[15] G. E. Blelloch, D. Anderson, and L. Dhulipala. Parlaylib-a toolkit for parallel algorithms on sharedmemory multicore machines. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures
(SPAA), 2020.
[16] G. E. Blelloch, J. T. Fineman, Y. Gu, and Y. Sun. Optimal parallel algorithms in the binary-forking
model. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), 2020.
[17] R. P. Brent. The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic expressions. J. ACM, 21(2):201–206, 1974.
[18] S. Burckhardt, D. Leijen, C. Sadowski, J. Yi, and T. Ball. Two for the price of one: A model for
parallel and incremental computation. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA), 2011.
[19] Y. Chen, U. A. Acar, and K. Tangwongsan. Functional programming for dynamic and large data with
self-adjusting computation. In International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP), Sep 2014.

18

[20] A. Demers, T. Reps, and T. Teitelbaum. Incremental evaluation of attribute grammars with application
to syntax directed editors. In ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), 1981.
[21] P. F. Dietz and D. D. Sleator. Two algorithms for maintaining order in a list. In Proceedings. 19th
ACM Symposium. Theory of Computing, pages 365–372, 1987.
[22] J. Evans. A scalable concurrent malloc (3) implementation for FreeBSD. In Proceedings of the BSDCan
conference, Ottawa, Canada, 2006.
[23] M. Feng and C. E. Leiserson. Efficient detection of determinacy races in cilk programs. Theory of
Computing Systems, 32(3):301–326, 1999.
[24] M. Frigo, P. Halpern, C. E. Leiserson, and S. Lewin-Berlin. Reducers and other cilk++ hyperobjects.
In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), 2009.
[25] M. Hammer, U. A. Acar, M. Rajagopalan, and A. Ghuloum. A proposal for parallel self-adjusting
computation. In Proceedings of the 2007 workshop on Declarative aspects of multicore programming,
pages 3–9, 2007.
[26] M. A. Hammer, U. A. Acar, and Y. Chen. CEAL: a C-based language for self-adjusting computation.
In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2009.
[27] W. Pugh and T. Teitelbaum. Incremental computation via function caching. In ACM Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), 1989.

19

